
===== PAGE 1 =====
Epidemic reproduction numbers in spatial networks
Zahra Ghadiri, Jari Saram¨ aki, and Takayuki Hiraoka
Department of Computer Science, Aalto University, 00076 Espoo, Finland
The basic and effective reproduction numbers are widely used metrics for characterizing the
dynamics of infectious disease epidemics. However, the interpretation of these numbers is based
on the assumption of homogeneous mixing and may not hold in real-world populations where the
contact patterns deviate from that assumption. In this paper, we present a network-based framework
to compare reproduction numbers in populations with and without spatial structure, while other
parameters of the disease remain fixed. Using this framework, we show that in homogeneously mixed
populations, in the absence of external interventions, the effective reproduction number decreases
exponentially as the susceptible population declines. In contrast, in spatially structured populations,
the basic reproduction number is smaller, and the effective reproduction number initially decreases
faster but eventually converges to unity. We show that the reproduction number is determined by
the level of competition between infectious nodes, which is governed by the network structure. Our
results suggest that without knowledge of the network structure, reproduction numbers may not
be informative for parameterizing the contagiousness of the disease or predicting the behavior of
epidemic spreading.
I. INTRODUCTION
The transmission of infectious diseases involves an in-
tricate interplay of biological, social, and environmen-
tal factors, rendering epidemic dynamics inherently com-
plex. This complexity poses challenges in understand-
ing how outbreaks unfold, predicting their future course,
and designing effective interventions. A widely adopted
approach to address these challenges is to reduce epi-
demic behavior to a single representative quantity. To
characterize the epidemic dynamics at its initial stages,
the basic reproduction numberR 0 is commonly used [1].
This number represents the expected number of infec-
tions caused by an initially infected individual in a fully
susceptible population.
Beyond usingR 0, monitoring real-time changes in
disease transmission is crucial for assessing the effects
of changes in contact patterns, intervention strategies,
and the depletion of the susceptible pool. This can be
achieved through the effective reproduction number, de-
noted byR eff [2–4], which represents the expected num-
ber of new infections caused by a single infected individ-
ual under the present circumstances [5]. The effective
reproduction number is particularly valuable when a siz-
able fraction of the population has already been infected
so that the assumptions behindR 0 no longer hold.
These reproduction numbers are considered key vari-
ables in infectious disease epidemiology because they are
associated with the threshold behavior of epidemics. Us-
ing branching process arguments, one can show that the
disease invades a population and spreads widely when
R0 >1, while it dies out rapidly otherwise. Similarly,
an ongoing outbreak will continue to grow as long as
Reff >1, whereas the incidence will decline ifR eff falls
below one. Thus, reproduction numbers provide a con-
cise metric that informs public health authorities about
the risks associated with infectious diseases and the ef-
fectiveness of control measures, such as vaccination [6]
and non-pharmaceutical interventions [3, 7, 8].
Despite their widespread acceptance as a fundamental
concept, however, limitations of reproduction numbers
have also been recognized. One limitation is that inter-
pretations of reproduction numbers are deeply rooted in
the assumption of a homogeneously mixed population, in
which individuals interact randomly, and every infected
individual has an equal chance of infecting every other.
In reality, however, this assumption does not hold: in-
dividuals typically have contact with a small subset of
all others in the population. A primary factor that de-
termines this subset is spatial constraints, as proximity
is required for disease transmission. These spatial con-
straints translate into a contact structure abundant in
triangles, in which contact ofiwithjandkimplies con-
tact betweenjandk.
This discrepancy in assumptions about the contact
structure makes the interpretation of the reproduction
numbers less straightforward than what the traditional
approach offers [9]. In the traditional approach, per-
contact disease transmissibility andR 0 are directly pro-
portional to one another. However, with a more elabo-
rate contact structure, this may not be the case. Fur-
thermore, mean-field models based on the homogeneous
mixing assumption suggest that epidemics initially grow
exponentially at a rate dictated byR 0, and subse-
quentlyR eff exponentially decays to zero. Yet, in out-
breaks of HIV/AIDS [10, 11], Ebola [12], and COVID-
19 [13], a polynomial spread has been observed. Under
such a subexponential growth, the estimated effective
reproduction number gradually approaches unity over
time [14, 15]. However, these previous studies remain
largely phenomenological and do not provide an explana-
tion of the microscopic mechanisms behind this behavior
of the reproduction number.
In this paper, we focus on how the spatial constraints
of the contact structure in the population affect the re-
production numbers while keeping per-contact transmis-
sibility fixed. The spatial constraints can be incorporated
by modelling the contact patterns as a network through
arXiv:2603.22150v1  [q-bio.PE]  23 Mar 2026
===== PAGE 2 =====
2
which infection spreads [16–18]. We use analytical cal-
culations and simulations to systematically compare re-
production numbers between stylized models of random
and spatial networks. We demonstrate that the loopy
contact structures induced by spatial constraints create
competition between infectious individuals, reducing the
basic reproduction number and driving the effective re-
production number towards unity.
This paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we
introduce the models for epidemic dynamics and contact
networks, and define the reproduction number per gener-
ationR g. In Section III, we present our main results. We
first derive the basic reproduction numberR 0 for random
geometric graphs and compare it to the correspondingR0
for Erd˝ os-R´ enyi graphs. We then analyze the behavior
ofR g as a function ofgfor the two network models. Fi-
nally, we derive the reproduction number as a function of
the force of infection for all networks interpolating across
the spectrum of spatiality and degree heterogeneity. We
discuss the implications of our findings and conclude in
Section IV.
II. MODELS
A. Epidemic dynamics
In this work, we model a population as an undi-
rected contact network where the nodes represent in-
dividuals and the edges represent interactions between
them through which the disease can be transmitted. We
assume the contact network remains static throughout
the epidemic. We focus on two categories of canoni-
cal compartmental epidemic models on contact networks:
The susceptible-infectious-recovered (SIR) model and the
susceptible-infectious (SI) model. In both models, the
population is initially fully susceptible except for a ran-
domly chosen infected node. Transmission occurs be-
tween an infected node and a susceptible node connected
to it independently at a certain rate. After transmission,
the susceptible node becomes infected and can infect its
susceptible neighbors. In the SI model, an infected node
will remain permanently infected, while in the SIR model,
an infected node eventually transitions to the recovered
state. A recovered node will no longer become infected
or transmit the disease to others. Here, we assume Pois-
son processes with constant rates of infection and recov-
ery [19, 20].
We adopt the epidemic percolation network (EPN)
framework to implement the SI/SIR epidemic [19]. An
EPN is a directed network with edges denoting potential
transmission from the tail node to the head node, pro-
vided that the tail is infected and the head is susceptible.
This framework offers a way to map a stochastic epidemic
process onto a static percolation model, thereby making
the dynamics tractable.
More precisely, given an undirected contact network
G= (V, E), we encode stochastic transmission by an
EPN as follows: For each connected pair of nodes{i, j} ∈
E, we construct two directed edgesi→jandj→i, with
weights equal to the timeti→j it would take forito trans-
mit the disease toj, and the timet j→i it would take forj
to transmit the disease toi, respectively. Both times are
drawn from an exponential distribution with rateβ, that
is,p(t i→j) =βe −βti→j . We also draw a random timer i it
takes for each nodei∈Vto recover from an exponential
distribution with rateα, that is,p(r i) =αe −αri . Suppose
nodeibecomes infected at timet i. In the SIR dynam-
ics, the infection is transmitted from nodeito nodejat
timet j =t i +t i→j ifiremains infected (i.e.,t i→j < ri)
andjremains susceptible by then. Eventually,irecovers
at timet i +r i. In the SI dynamics, an infectious node
remains infected forever, that is,α→0. Thus, infec-
tion is transmitted fromitojat timet j =t i +t i→j if
jremains susceptible. Then, the epidemic percolation
network (EPN) consists of only the directed edgesi→j
that transmit the infection (i.e.,t i→j < ri) with trans-
mission timet i→j. Under this model, the transmission
probabilityT, the probability of transmission between
two nodes, can be written as [21]
T= β
α+β ,(1)
whereT= 1 represents the SI dynamics.
B. Reproduction number per generation
In a partially susceptible population, the state of the
epidemic is typically represented by an effective repro-
duction number. In this work, we quantify the effective
reproduction number as a function of generation, denoted
byR g. Consider that infection begins at nodeu 0, ran-
domly chosen from the set of nodes in the EPN. A sus-
ceptible nodeiin the EPN becomes infected through a
pathγ, connectingu 0 toi. The transmission time of such
a path in the EPN is the sum of the transmission times
of its constituent edges, i.e.,
X
(i→j)∈γ
ti→j,(2)
wheret i→j denotes the transmission time of edgei→j.
We define the generationg(i) of an infectious nodeias
the number of edges of the path with the shortest trans-
mission time fromu 0 toi. In this framework, the initially
infected node belongs to generation zero,g(u 0) = 0, and
each node in generationg+1 is infected by a node in gen-
erationg. We define the reproduction number per gener-
ation,R g, as the expected number of secondary infections
caused by a node infected in generationg. Therefore, the
reproduction number per generation is given by
Rg = ng+1
ng
,(3)
wheren g is the number of nodes in generationg. The
value ofR g, as a function ofg, determines the depth of
===== PAGE 3 =====
3
the spread of infection. A larger value ofg max = max{g|
Rg >0}implies a deeper spread, meaning that on av-
erage the outbreak reaches susceptible nodes through
longer transmission paths.
Forg= 0, the reproduction number per generation is
equal to the basic reproduction numberR 0. The early
phase of spread is commonly approximated by a branch-
ing process with a reproductive rateR 0.
C. Network structure
A contact networkG= (V, E) provides a represen-
tation of interactions as a set of edgesE, connecting a
set of nodesV, representing individuals. When informa-
tion about interactions between individuals is limited, a
common assumption is that they interact randomly, po-
tentially with different levels of activity. In this scenario,
the contact network can be modelled using the configu-
ration model, with its degree distribution reflecting the
heterogeneity in contact numbers.
However, real-world interactions are not necessarily
random, but are often shaped by spatial and social con-
straints. For example, frequent physical contact typically
occurs between individuals who live together or near each
other, such as family members or roommates, or between
individuals who share jobs or hobbies, such as coworkers
and friends. In other words, the specific characteristics
of the individuals (nodes) can influence the formation of
connections (edges) in the network. In such cases, geo-
metric networks provide a suitable framework to model
contact networks. In geometric networks, nodes are as-
signed coordinates in a metric space, and edges are more
likely to be formed between nodes closer in the metric
space [22, 23]. When modelling real-world networks with
geometric network models, the coordinates assigned to
nodes represent the characteristics that affect their con-
nections.
Let us refer to the tendency to form connections based
on proximity within an underlying metric space as spa-
tiality. The level of spatiality differs between various net-
work models. Configuration model networks, including
Erd˝ os-R´ enyi graphs, lack spatial structure. In contrast,
random geometric graphs exhibit maximal spatiality. In
a random geometric graph, the nodes are uniformly dis-
tributed within a unit square in ad-dimensional Eu-
clidean space. Here, we assume that our space is two-
dimensional and that the nodes are distributed accord-
ing to a Poisson point process with intensityρ. An edge
is formed between two nodes if their Euclidean distance
is less than
p
⟨k⟩/(πρ), where⟨k⟩is the average de-
gree of the network. Both random geometric graphs and
Erd˝ os-R´ enyi graphs exhibit the Poisson degree distribu-
tion. Hence, any difference in dynamics in these two net-
work models arises from the presence of spatial structure
in random geometric graphs and the lack of spatiality in
Erd˝ os-R´ enyi graphs.
Furthermore, we use the heterogeneous spatial network
(HSN) model, introduced by Bogu˜ n´ a et al. [24], to ex-
plore the behaviour of the reproduction number across
the spatiality and degree heterogeneity spectrum. In the
HSN model, each node is assigned an expected degree
and coordinates in the metric space. Given these node
characteristics, the model generates an undirected net-
work where (i) the degree of each node is a Poisson ran-
dom variable with a mean equal to the expected degree
of the node, and (ii) the nodes are more likely to be
linked with each other if they are close to each other in
the metric space. The spatiality of the network, that is,
the propensity of the nodes to connect to other nodes in
their proximity, is governed by an independent param-
eter called the temperature, denoted byτ. High values
ofτcorrespond to the configuration model, where nodes
form connections randomly regardless of their positions.
In contrast, asτ→0, nearby nodes are more likely to be
connected, resulting in a strongly spatial network. We
use this model to generate networks with negative bino-
mial degree distributions with varying levels of spatiality
controlled byτ. The degree heterogeneity is parame-
terised by the dispersion parameterrof the binomial
distribution; a smallerrimplies a more heterogeneous
degree distribution.
III. RESUL TS
A. The basic reproduction number
In this section, we discuss the basic reproduction num-
ber,R 0, in Erd˝ os-R´ enyi graphs and random geometric
graphs. Recall that, in our setup, infection starts spread-
ing from a single initially infected individual,u 0. Hence,
the basic reproduction number is equal to the expected
number of nodes in the first generation because every
node in the first generation is necessarily infected byu 0.
Moreover, each node in the first generation is a neighbor
ofu 0 in the EPN.
The basic reproduction number in an arbitrary net-
work depends on the transmission probability, the ex-
pected node degree, and the presence of short loops. Let
us first discuss the case where the contact network is a
tree, which contains no loops. Under this assumption,
the EPN is also a tree. Since there is exactly one path
between two nodes in a tree, all neighbors ofu 0 in the
EPN belong to the first generation and can only get in-
fected through the edge fromu 0. Therefore, the basic
reproduction number in a tree is given by
R0 =T⟨k⟩,(4)
where⟨k⟩is the average degree andTis the transmission
probability.
In contrast, the presence of triangles results in a
smaller basic reproduction number. If an edge exists
between two neighbors of the initially infected nodeu 0,
there are two distinct paths through which the infection
===== PAGE 4 =====
4
A B
C
Initially
infected
node
Secondary
infected
node
Susceptible
node
Transmission
edge
EPN edge
 n1=4
n1=3
R0(A)=4.0
p(A)=0.001
R0(A)=3.5
p(A)=0.062
R0(A)=2.83
p(A)=0.16
R0(A)=2.49
p(A)=0.224
FIG. 1.The basic reproduction number in a random
geometric graph.(A) Visualization of a random geometric
graph. The nodes relevant for the computation of the basic
reproduction numberR 0, defined as the expected number of
neighbors (in blue) infected directly by the initially infected
node (in red), are shown in the circle. (B) In the presence
of an EPN edge between neighbors, the same EPN configu-
ration can lead to two different numbers of nodes in the first
generation,n 1. (C) An initially infected node (in red) with
the same degree can have different neighborhood isomorphic
classesA, each occurring with probabilityp(A) and resulting
in the expected number of secondary cases,R 0(A).
1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 19
generation g
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6PMF
ERG
RGG
FIG. 2.The distribution of the generationgof the
neighbors of the initially infected node in Erd˝ os-
R´ enyi graphs (ERGs) and random geometric graphs
(RGGs).The network size isN= 10 4 and the average de-
gree is⟨k⟩= 12. The transmission rate isβ= 1, and the
recovery rate isα= 0.001. The result is an average over 200
runs.
can spread fromu 0 to each of the two neighbors. The
first path directly traverses the edge betweenu 0 and the
neighbor. The second is a path of length two that goes
fromu 0 to the other neighbor and then traverses the
edge between the neighbors. These two paths compete
in transmission, and the infection will travel along the
path with the shorter transmission time (Fig. 1B). The
susceptible neighbor will get infected through the edge
with the least transmission time.
1 3 5 7 9 11
average degree k
1
3
5
7
9
11R0
ERG
A
T=0.99
T=0.5
T=0.25
1 3 5 7 9 11
average degree k
1
3
5
7
9
11
RGG
B
0.0 2.5 5.0 7.5 10.0 12.5 15.0 17.5 20.0
T k
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
RRGG
0  / RERG
0
C
y=1
FIG. 3.The basic reproduction numberR 0 as a
function of average degree⟨k⟩and transmission prob-
abilityT.A) ShowsR 0 as a function of⟨k⟩for Erd˝ os-
R´ enyi graphs (ERGs) and B) for random geometric graphs
(RGGs). C) Shows the ratio betweenR 0 in RGG toR 0 in
ERG as a function ofT⟨k⟩. The transmission probability is
T∈ {0.25,0.5,0.99}. Each simulation and analytical result
(points and lines, respectively) is an average over 500 runs
on a network of sizeN= 10000. For ERGs, the analytical
lines follow the tree-like assumption of Eq. (4). For RGGs,
the analytical lines are calculated from Eq. (13).
Figure 2 shows the probability distribution for the gen-
eration of the neighbors of the initially infected node in
the EPN. As this figure shows, in an Erd˝ os-R´ enyi graph,
the only way a susceptible neighbor is not directly in-
fected by the initially infected node is when the transmis-
sion travels through a long cyclic path and reaches the
neighbor before direct transmission occurs. Figure 3A
compares the value ofR 0 for Erd˝ os-R´ enyi graphs with
different expected degree values with their equivalent in
a tree, Eq. (4). For a small expected degree, Eq. (4)
provides an accurate approximation
In random geometric graphs, however, triangles in the
EPN are not negligible. As Fig. 2 shows, a significant
fraction of neighbors belong to the second and third gen-
erations, meaning that they have been infected through
paths of length two and three. Nodes in random geo-
metric graphs are connected based on proximity, which
increases the frequency and influence of short loops com-
pared to long loops as pathways for infecting the neigh-
bors of the initially infectious individual. In particular,
loops of length three—the shortest possible—play a cru-
cial role in determining the basic reproduction number.
In the following, we present a more precise approxi-
mation ofR 0 in random geometric graphs by explicitly
accounting for loops of length three. This approximation,
which we elaborate in the following, is in good agreement
with simulation results, as shown in Fig. 3B.
The initially infected nodeu 0 can transmit the infec-
tion to its neighbors until it recovers. The basic reproduc-
tion number,R 0, equals the expected number of neigh-
bors infected directly from a randomly chosenu 0. Let
===== PAGE 5 =====
5
us focus on the subgraph of the contact network induced
byu 0 and the set of its neighbors, denoted byN(u 0)
(Fig. 1A). For simplicity, we relabel the initially infected
node asu 0 = 0 and other nodes in this subgraph as
i∈ N(0) fori= 1, . . . , k, wherek=|N(0)|is the degree
of node 0. We represent the structure of the subgraph
induced by the nodes in set{0} ∪ N(0) by an adjacency
matrixA, where the first row/column corresponds to the
initially infected node. Then,A 0i = 1 for alli∈ N(0)
andA ij = 1 ifiandjare connected.
In this setup, the basic reproduction number can be
computed as
R0 =
X
A
R0(A)p(A),(5)
wherep(A) denotes the probability of configurationA
andR 0(A) is the basic reproduction number for a specific
configurationAaround node 0.
We calculatep(A) by generating random geometric
graphs withNnodes and expected degree⟨k⟩, and re-
peatedly sampling the neighborhood of a randomly cho-
sen node. By counting the times eachAappears, we
can find the ensemble of all adjacency matricesAin a
network with a certain average degree⟨k⟩and calculate
p(A) (Fig. 1C).
To calculateR 0(A), we make the simplifying assump-
tion that nodes inN(0) become infected either through
paths of length one (single edges) or two from node 0.
Hence, nodei∈ N(0) will remain susceptible, or get in-
fected either by node 0 through the path 0→ior by an
already infected neighborj∈(N(0)∩ N(i)) through the
path 0→j→i. The number of paths of length two from
node 0 to its neighboriis given by
A2
0i =
kX
j=0
A0jAji,(6)
and uniquely determined byA.
Nodeican be infected through its common neighbor
with node 0 that was infected earlier. We represent the
set of such neighbors byV i
Vi ={j|j∈(N(0)∩ N(i)), t 0→j < t0→i}.(7)
In the following, we proceed in four steps. First, we
compute the probability distribution of the cardinality
|Vi|, which represents the number of competitors of the
initially infected node 0 attempting to infect nodei. Sec-
ond, we determine the probability that the transmission
time from node 0 to nodeiis shorter than the recovery
time of node 0. Third, we evaluate the probability that
node 0 infects nodeibefore any other node inV i. Finally,
by combining the results of the previous three steps for
alli∈ N(0), we deriveR 0(A).
By lettingσdenote the permutation onN(0), where
σ(j)< σ(i) indicatest 0→j < t0→i, we can write the
probability of the cardinality of setV i as
p(|Vi|=m|A 2
0i, σ(i) =π)
= 1 k−1
A2
0i

π−1
m
 k−π
A2
0i −m

. (8)
Next, the probability that the initial node 0 can trans-
mit the disease toibefore recovering, conditioned on
σ(i), is
p(t0→i < r0 |σ(i) =π) =
P
σ:σ(i)=π p(t0→i < r0, σ)
p(π)
=k!
Z ∞
0
dx1βe−βx1 · · ·
Z ∞
xσ(i)−1
dxπβe−βxπ
Z ∞
xπ
drαe−αr
×
Z ∞
xπ
dxπi+1βe−βxπ+1 · · ·
Z ∞
xk−1
dxkβe−βxk
= k!
(k−π)!
πY
j=1
β
α+ (k−π+j)β .
(9)
Finally, to complete the chain of conditional probabil-
ities, we assume that the transmission from node 0 to
nodeitakes place before node 0 recovers, i.e.,t 0→i < r0.
This impliest 0→j < r0 for allj∈V i. To infect nodei,
node 0 competes with all neighbors ofiinV i that can
transmit the infection toibefore they recover. Then,
the probability that transmission takes place through the
path 0→i, conditioned ont 0→i < r0 and|V i|, is
p(10→i = 1|t 0→i < r0,|V i|=m)
=
mX
x=0
m
x
 T m(1−T) m−x
x+ 1 , (10)
whereT=β/(α+β) is the transmission probability, and
the indicator function1 0→i is defined as
10→i =
(
1 if transmission happens through edge (0, i)
0 otherwise.
(11)
The probabilityR(1 0→i = 1|σ(i) =π, A 2
0i) that a
nodei∈ N(u 0) gets infected through the path 0→i,
conditioned onσandA, is
R(10→i = 1|σ(i) =π, A 2
0i)
=p(t 0→i < r0 |σ(i) =π)
×
A2
0iX
m=0
p(10→i = 1|t 0→i < r0,|V i|=m)
×p(|V i|=m|A 2
0i, σ(i) =π).
(12)
Summing over all values ofσ(i) and all nodesi,R 0(A) is
R0(A) =
kX
i=1
kX
π=1
1
k R(10→i = 1|σ(i) =π, A 2
0i). (13)
===== PAGE 6 =====
6
The SI dynamic is a special case whereT= 1. Then,
R0(A) can be written as
R0(A) =
kX
i=1
1
1 +A 2
0i
A2
0iX
l=0
1
1 +l . (14)
Figure 3C compares the ratio of the basic reproduction
numberR 0 in random geometric graphs toR 0 in Erd˝ os-
R´ enyi graphs as a function ofT⟨k⟩. As the transmission
probability and the average degree increase, the differ-
ence inR 0 between the random geometric graph and the
Erd˝ os-R´ enyi graph becomes more pronounced, withR0 in
the random geometric graph approaching approximately
half of the value ofR 0 in the Erd˝ os-R´ enyi graph. It is
worth highlighting that this is due to the spatiality alone,
as the average degree, the degree distribution, the trans-
mission probability, and the network size are the same
for both graphs.
While the value ofR 0 in both Erd˝ os-R´ enyi graphs and
random geometric graphs deviates from that of a tree
with the same average degree and degree heterogeneity,
this deviation is more pronounced in random geomet-
ric graphs (Fig. 3). The main difference inR 0 between
Erd˝ os-R´ enyi graphs and random geometric graphs arises
from the contribution of loops of various lengths in trans-
mitting the infection (Fig. 2). Although short loops are
negligible in Erd˝ os-R´ enyi graphs, these graphs contain a
significant number of long loops. However, since trans-
mission along a long path is, on average, slower than
transmission across a single edge, the probability that it
competes with direct transmission from the initially in-
fected node to its neighbor is small, resulting in a smaller
deviation from tree-like behavior.
B. The reproduction number per generation
In this section, we will derive the reproduction num-
ber per generationR g for Erd˝ os-R´ enyi graphs and ran-
dom geometric graphs. We first focus on SI dynamics,
modelled by first passage percolation. For Erd˝ os-R´ enyi
graph, we will base our argument on the branching pro-
cess on finite graphs, and for random geometric graphs,
we show how the spatial constraint on network forma-
tion will affect the reproduction chance. Then, we study
the SIR dynamics by mapping it to a special case of first
passage percolation.
As defined in Eq. (3),R g is determined by the num-
ber of nodes in each generation,n g. To deriven g for
Erd˝ os-R´ enyi graphs, we present a theory introduced by
Bhamidi et al. [25]. Consider first-passage percolation,
where the transmission times of edgest i→j are indepen-
dent and identically distributed random variables with
an exponential distributionp(t i→j) =e −ti→j . Theorem
1 characterizes the probability distribution for the gen-
eration of an infected individual in networkG.
Theorem 1LetGbe an Erd˝ os-R´ enyi graph withnnodes
and average degree⟨k⟩>1. Thenp(g), the probability
0 20 40 60 80 100
generation g
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Rg
SI Dynamics
ERG
RGG
0 25 50 75 100
generation g
0.0
0.5
1.0
ng (CDF)
FIG. 4.The reproduction number per generationR g.
Results are shown for the SI dynamics on Erd˝ os-R´ enyi graphs
(ERGs) and random geometric graphs (RGGs). The inner
plot illustrates the normalized number of nodes per genera-
tionn g. Points indicate simulations and lines show analytical
results. All networks have sizeN= 10 4 and average degree
⟨k⟩= 6. Results are averaged over 500 runs.
that an infected individual belongs to generationg, is as
below
p(g) =N(alog(n), alog(n)),(15)
whereNis the standard normal distribution, and
a= ⟨k⟩
⟨k⟩ −1.(16)
Since the reproduction number per generation,R g, is de-
fined as the ratio between the numbers of individuals in
consecutive generations as in Eq. (3), we have
Rg = p(g+ 1)
p(g) = exp

1− 1 + 2g
2alogn

.(17)
Hence, in Erd˝ os-R´ enyi graphs,Rg decays exponentially
until the percolation process halts, as illustrated in Fig. 4.
This rapid decline results in a smallg max.
We now proceed to calculatingR g for SI dynamics in
random geometric graphs, where our strategy is again
to deriven g. For this, we first calculate the average
time of infection per generation. Nodeiwhich belongs
to generationghas at least one neighbor from gen-
erationg−1. Consider the set of random variables
X g
i ={t j→i |j∈ N(i), g(j) =g−1, t j < ti}wheret i→j
is the transmission time along the edgei→j. Define
Y g
i = minX g
i as the time difference between the infec-
tion of nodeiand the node that infects it. By definition,
the cumulative distribution function ofY g
i is given by
FY g
i
(y) =P(Y g
i ≤y) = 1−
Y
x∈X g
i
P(x > y) = 1−e−β|X g
i |y
(18)
===== PAGE 7 =====
7
where|X g
i |is the cardinality of the setX g
i . The last
equality holds sincet i→j follows an exponential distribu-
tion,P(x > y) =e−βy . The expected value ofY g
i is
E[Y g
i ] = 1
β|X g
i | .(19)
The average ofE[Y g
i ] over all nodes in generationg, de-
noted byE[Y g], is
E[Y g] = 1
β E
 1
|X g
i |

= 1
βmg
,(20)
where we introduce
mg =E
 1
|X g
i |
−1
.(21)
We assumem g is a function of transmission rateβand
average degree⟨k⟩and does not depend on generation,
i.e.,m g = ¯m(⟨k⟩, β). This is empirically validated as
shown in SI Fig. 7. Hence,
E[Y g] = 1
β¯m(⟨k⟩, β).(22)
Lett g denote the expected time of infection for a node
in generationg. Then,
tg =t g−1 +E[Y g].(23)
Combining Eqs. (22) and (23), we can conclude
tg =
gX
x=1
E[Y g] = g
⟨k⟩¯m(⟨k⟩, β).(24)
Equation (24) indicates that the expected time of infec-
tion per generationt g is linearly proportional to the gen-
erationg.
The next step is to find the number of nodes infected
as a function of time. We locate the initially infected
nodeu 0 at the origino, andυ d denotes the volume of the
unit ball inR d. DefineH t as the subset of nodes reached
by the SI dynamics starting from the origin by the time
t. LetB(x, s) be the Euclidean ball centred atxwith
radiuss. Theorem 1.1 in Coletti et al. [26] indicates that
there exists a constantϕ >0 such that for anyε∈(0,1),
almost surely for larget:
(1−ε)B(o, ϕ)⊆ 1
t Ht ⊆(1 +ε)B(o, ϕ).(25)
Combining Eqs. (24) and (25), we can conclude that
gX
x=0
nx =Cg 2,(26)
whereCis a constant related to the node density. Now,
we can calculate the reproduction number as
Rg = 2g+ 1
2g−1 .(27)
Hence, asgincreases,R g converges to unity, in agreement
with the simulation results shown in Fig. 4.
In SIR dynamics, each edge (i, j) can transmit the dis-
ease fromitojift ij < ri. The probability of transmis-
sion timet ij, conditioned ont ij < ri is
P(t ij|tij < ri) = P(t ij, tij < ri)
P(t ij < ri) ,(28)
where
P(t ij < ri) = β
α+β ,(29)
and
P(t ij, tij < ri) =βe −βtij
Z ∞
tij
αe−αxdx=βe −(α+β)tij .
(30)
Hence,
P(t ij|tij < ri) = (α+β)e −(α+β)tij .(31)
The transmission time of edges in the EPN still follows
the exponential distribution, but with rateα+β. As a
result, the reproduction number per generation under the
SIR dynamics follows Eqs. (17) and (27) for Erd˝ os-R´ enyi
graphs and random geometric graphs, respectively.
Figure 4 illustrates the reproduction numberR g as a
function of generationgfor Erd˝ os-R´ enyi graphs and ran-
dom geometric graphs. The inset plot shows that then g
results from the simulations of both Erd˝ os-R´ enyi graphs
and random geometric graphs are in agreement with the
analytical results presented in Eqs. (15) and (26), respec-
tively. In Erd˝ os-R´ enyi graphs,Rg decays exponentially
until the outbreak ends due to limited network size. In a
random geometric graph, the decay inR g is faster than
Erd˝ os-R´ enyi graphs in the beginning untilRg reaches
unity. Asn g grows cumulatively withg 2,R g remains
equal to unity until percolation halts and no more In-
fected nodes are produced.
It is worth highlighting that the difference in Erd˝ os-
R´ enyi graphs and random geometric graphs in terms of
Rg is due to the spatial network structure and is not
caused by differentR 0 values (SI Fig. 6).
C. The reproduction numberR g is determined by
the competition between neighbors
In this section, we explain how the reproduction num-
ber per generation can be concluded from the competi-
tion between infected nodes in each generation, regard-
less of the network structure.
Similarly to our argument for the basic reproduction
number, let us first consider the case where the contact
network is formed by a branching process that results in
a tree. In such a tree, since there are no loops, when a
node becomes infected, it has only one infected neighbor:
===== PAGE 8 =====
8
the node that transmitted the disease to it. Therefore,
Rg remains equal toR 0 until it drops to zero.
However, in a network with loops, when a suscepti-
ble node becomes infected, there may be more than one
neighbor that was infected earlier. In that case, these
infected neighbors will compete to transmit the disease
to the susceptible node. If a susceptible node has more
infected neighbors at the time of its infection, the compe-
tition to infect it is stronger, and the chance of transmis-
sion for each infected individual is lower. Because of this
competition, as the number of infected nodes increases,
the reproduction number decreases fromR 0, in contrast
to the tree case.
Figure 5A shows the average fraction of each node’s
neighbors infected earlier than the node, denoted by
nb(g), as a function of the generationgof the node for
Erd˝ os-R´ enyi graphs and random geometric graphs. In an
Erd˝ os-R´ enyi graph, the fraction of infected neighbors of a
susceptible node increases rapidly. This is because, as the
population of infected nodes becomes larger, the chances
of neighbors being infected increase. On the other hand,
in random geometric graphs, this fraction increases more
quickly with the generation, until it reaches the value of
0.5, i.e., half of the neighbors of a susceptible node are
infected, after which it remains constant.
The fractionn b(g) determines the value ofR g. The
number of secondary infected individuals for a node in
generationgdepends on the number of susceptible neigh-
bors of the node at the time of its infection and the com-
petition it faces when attempting to infect them. Since
a node in generationg+ 1 gets infected through an edge
leading to a node in generationg, we can conclude that
a node in generationgwill infect each of its neighbors
with probability 1/(⟨k g+1⟩nb(g+ 1)), where⟨k g⟩is the
average degree of a node in generationg. A node in
generationghas on average⟨k g⟩(1−n b(g)) susceptible
neighbors when it gets infected and starts spreading the
infection. Therefore,R g, the expected number of sec-
ondary infections caused by a node infected in generation
g, is
Rg = ⟨kg⟩(1−n b(g))
⟨kg+1⟩nb(g+ 1) .(32)
Figure 5A shows the relationship betweenR g (scatter
plot) and⟨k g⟩(1−n b(g))/(⟨k g+1⟩nb](g+ 1)) (line plot)
as a function of generationgfor Erd˝ os-R´ enyi graphs
and random geometric graphs. In Erd˝ os-R´ enyi graphs,
nb(g) exponentially increases, as a result,R g decays
exponentially. In a random geometric graph, however,
nb(g) first increases rapidly and then remains constant
atn b(g)≈0.5 until the epidemic dies out. Hence
Rg = 1
nb
−1 = 1 for large enoughg.(33)
Here, we use the fact that⟨k g−1⟩ ≈ ⟨kg⟩in random geo-
metric graphs.
This relationship betweenR g andn b generalizes to a
wider range of networks beyond Erd˝ os-R´ enyi graphs and
random geometric graphs. We validate this across the full
spectrum of spatiality and degree heterogeneity using the
heterogeneous spatial network (HSN) model. Figure 5B
shows the relationship between the two sides of Eq. (32)
as a function of generationg. Regardless of degree het-
erogeneity determined byr, in a network with spatial
structure,R g goes to unity for large enoughg, a behav-
ior fully explained by the competition between infected
neighbors at the time of infection. As Fig. 5C shows, the
decrease ofR g from unity towards zero becomes more
gradual as the temperatureτdecreases, i.e., spatiality
increases.
Figure 5D shows the maximum generationg max for
SI dynamics as a function of the dispersion parameterr
and the temperatureτ. Higherg max indicates a slower
decay in the tail ofR g, as we observed for random geo-
metric graphs. Moving from the random to spatial net-
works (high temperature to low temperature), theg max
increases significantly aroundτ= 0.3, and the decay in
Rg becomes slower until lim g→∞ Rg = 1 as the network
becomes spatial.
IV. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we have studied the effect of spatially
embedded contact patterns on the basic and effective re-
production numbers. We represent the spatial structure
of the population using network epidemic models. To
facilitate our analysis, we introduced the reproduction
number per generation,R g, defined as the expected num-
ber of new infections caused by nodes in generationg.
With a random contact structure, as captured by
Erd˝ os-R´ enyi graphs, the basic reproduction number can
be approximated by the size of the first generation in a
branching process with intensity proportional to the av-
erage degree of the network and the transmission prob-
ability. However, when the contacts are spatially con-
strained, as captured by random geometric graphs, we
observed that the basic reproduction numberR 0 is lower
than predicted by the branching process with the same
intensity (Figure 3). This is because the spatial con-
tact structure leads to the formation of triangles and
other short loops, reducing the likelihood of direct dis-
ease transmission from the initially infected individual to
its neighbors. To account for the impact of short loops
in random geometric graphs, we included loops of length
three (triangles) in our calculation ofR 0. Comparing
our analytical results with simulations demonstrates that
incorporating these loops can substantially improve the
accuracy of theR 0 estimate.
As infection spreads in an Erd˝ os-R´ enyi graph where
there are no spatial constraints, the reproduction num-
ber per generation,R g, decreases exponentially until it
reaches zero, marking the end of the spreading. How-
ever, in the spatial case modelled by random geomet-
ric graphs, this decline is faster than exponential un-
tilR g ≈1 (Figure 4). At that point,R g remains ap-
===== PAGE 9 =====
9
0 20 40 60 80 100
generation g
0
1
2
3
4
5
Rg
A
ERG
RGG
0 20 40 60 80 100
generation g
0
1
2
3
4
5
Rg
B
r = 2
r = 4
r = 16
0 20 40 60 80 100
generation g
0
1
2
3
4
5
Rg
C
= 0.33
= 0.2
= 0.01
10 2
 10 1
 100 101
temperature 
20
40
60
80
100gmax
D
Neg.Binom. r=2
Neg.Binom. r=4
Neg.Binom. r=8
Neg.Binom. r=16
0 25 50 75 100
generation g
0.2
0.5
0.8
1.1nb(g)
0 25 50 75 100
generation g
0.2
0.5
0.8
1.1nb(g)
0 25 50 75 100
generation g
0.2
0.5
0.8
1.1nb(g)
FIG. 5.The reproduction number per generationR g and competition between infected nodes.(A-C) Points
indicateR g, and lines correspond to the right-hand side of Eq. (32) as a function of generationg. Insets shown b(g). A) Results
for Erd˝ os-R´ enyi graphs (ERGs) and random geometric graphs (RGGs). B) Results for HSNs with negative binomial degree
distributions with dispersion parameterr∈[2,4,16] and spatialityτ= 0.01. C) Results for HSNs with negative binomial degree
distributions with dispersion parameterr= 16 and spatialityτ∈[0.33,0.2,0.01]. D) Shows the total number of generations
gmax = max{g|Rg >0}. Results are shown for the temperaturesτ∈(10 −2,10) and the dispersion parametersr∈[2,4,8,16].
All Results correspond to SI dynamics. All HSNs have sizeN= 5000, while ERGs and RGGs have sizeN= 10 4. All networks
have average degree⟨k⟩= 6. Results are averaged over 10000 simulation runs.
proximately constant until the epidemic dies out and no
further generations are produced. This behavior is con-
firmed analytically by examining the number of nodes in
each generation. In Erd˝ os-R´ enyi graphs, the probability
of an infected node belonging to each generation follows
a normal distribution (Eq. 15). In contrast, in random
geometric graphs, the number of nodes reached by perco-
lation up to a given generation grows quadratically with
the number of generations (Eq. 25).
We have shown thatR g is determined by the levels
of competition between infected nodes to transmit the
disease to susceptible nodes in generationsgandg+ 1,
independently of the underlying network structure. This
competition is caused by the presence of loops in the net-
work, and can be quantified by the fraction of neighbors
infected earlier,n b.
We have shown that increasing network spatiality,
which increases the amount of loops, shifts the behav-
ior ofR g from an exponentially decreasing regime to one
in whichR g converges toR g ≈1 (Figure 5). We note
thatn b(g) is related to the notion of force of infection
in epidemiology. Thus, the asymptotic value ofR g = 1
arises from a generation-invariant force of infection.
Our findings raise questions about the conventional use
of reproduction numbers as a tool for identifying conta-
giousness and predicting the epidemic dynamics. In a
homogeneously mixed population, the contagiousness of
a disease can be straightforwardly represented by the ba-
sic reproduction number. However, our findings suggest
that the network structure also plays an important role in
determining the basic reproduction number, and should
be taken into account for assessing the contagiousness.
In addition, the trend in the effective reproduction num-
ber is often simply extrapolated to make short-term pre-
dictions about the course of the disease spreading. For
example, a rapid decrease in the effective reproduction
number towards one is usually interpreted as a sign that
the outbreak is approaching its peak and that infections
will soon begin to decline. In this work, we have shown
that this is not the case in populations with spatial struc-
ture, whereR g can stabilise at unity for an extended pe-
riod before eventually dropping to zero. This suggests
that conclusions based on a simple extrapolation may be
misguided. We note that the convergence of the effective
===== PAGE 10 =====
10
reproduction number to unity is consistent with the pre-
viously observed polynomial epidemic growth in empiri-
cal studies [10–13], making spatial structure a plausible
explanation for these observations.
The reproduction number gained significant attention
during the COVID-19 pandemic. Both the basic repro-
duction number,R 0, and the effective reproduction num-
ber,R eff , have been widely used to evaluate interventions
and guide policy decisions, making an in-depth investi-
gation of these measures essential. In our view,R 0 has
been historically something of an overloaded concept: a
single parameter that captures the epidemic threshold,
the contagiousness of the disease, its early-stage dynam-
ics, and the final epidemic size. We argue that these dif-
ferent concepts need to be decoupled and carefully exam-
ined individually. In particular,R 0 is a composite that
represents both the contact structure and the intrinsic
transmissibility of the disease. Our findings suggest that
accurately assessing the stage of an epidemic and antici-
pating its future trajectory fromR 0 requires accounting
for the underlying contact structure.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
J.S. and T.H. are supported by the Strategic Research
Council (SRC) established within the Research Coun-
cil of Finland (Decision Numbers: 364386 and 364371).
The calculations presented above were performed using
computer resources within the Aalto University School
of Science “Science-IT” project.
[1] R. M. Anderson and R. M. May,Infectious Diseases
of Humans: Dynamics and Control(Oxford University
PressOxford, 1991).
[2] J. S. Huisman, J. Scire, D. C. Angst, J. Li, R. A. Neher,
M. H. Maathuis, S. Bonhoeffer, and T. Stadler, Estima-
tion and worldwide monitoring of the effective reproduc-
tive number of SARS-CoV-2, eLife11, e71345 (2022).
[3] S. Flaxman, S. Mishra, A. Gandy, H. J. T. Unwin, T. A.
Mellan, H. Coupland, C. Whittaker, H. Zhu, T. Berah,
J. W. Eaton, M. Monod, Imperial College COVID-19 Re-
sponse Team, P. N. Perez-Guzman, N. Schmit, L. Cilloni,
K. E. C. Ainslie, M. Baguelin, A. Boonyasiri, O. Boyd,
L. Cattarino, L. V. Cooper, Z. Cucunub´ a, G. Cuomo-
Dannenburg, A. Dighe, B. Djaafara, I. Dorigatti, S. L.
Van Elsland, R. G. FitzJohn, K. A. M. Gaythorpe,
L. Geidelberg, N. C. Grassly, W. D. Green, T. Hal-
lett, A. Hamlet, W. Hinsley, B. Jeffrey, E. Knock, D. J.
Laydon, G. Nedjati-Gilani, P. Nouvellet, K. V. Parag,
I. Siveroni, H. A. Thompson, R. Verity, E. Volz, C. E.
Walters, H. Wang, Y. Wang, O. J. Watson, P. Win-
skill, X. Xi, P. G. T. Walker, A. C. Ghani, C. A.
Donnelly, S. Riley, M. A. C. Vollmer, N. M. Ferguson,
L. C. Okell, and S. Bhatt, Estimating the effects of non-
pharmaceutical interventions on COVID-19 in Europe,
Nature584, 257 (2020).
[4] A. Pan, L. Liu, C. Wang, H. Guo, X. Hao, Q. Wang,
J. Huang, N. He, H. Yu, X. Lin, S. Wei, and T. Wu, As-
sociation of Public Health Interventions With the Epi-
demiology of the COVID-19 Outbreak in Wuhan, China,
JAMA323, 1915 (2020).
[5] J. Wallinga and P. Teunis, Different Epidemic Curves
for Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Reveal Similar
Impacts of Control Measures, American Journal of Epi-
demiology160, 509 (2004).
[6] R. S. Dhillon, D. Srikrishna, and G. Chowell, Getting
to zero in the DR Congo Ebola outbreak, The Lancet
Infectious Diseases20, 395 (2020).
[7] M. Jeyanathan, S. Afkhami, F. Smaill, M. S. Miller, B. D.
Lichty, and Z. Xing, Immunological considerations for
COVID-19 vaccine strategies, Nature Reviews Immunol-
ogy20, 615 (2020).
[8] R. N. Thompson, C. A. Gilligan, and N. J. Cunniffe,
Control fast or control smart: When should invading
pathogens be controlled?, PLOS Computational Biology
14, e1006014 (2018).
[9] L. A. Meyers, B. Pourbohloul, M. Newman, D. M.
Skowronski, and R. C. Brunham, Network theory and
SARS: Predicting outbreak diversity, Journal of Theo-
retical Biology232, 71 (2005).
[10] S. A. Colgate, E. A. Stanley, J. M. Hyman, S. P. Layne,
and C. Qualls, Risk behavior-based model of the cubic
growth of acquired immunodeficiency syndrome in the
United States., Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences86, 4793 (1989).
[11] B. Szendr´ oi and G. Cs´ anyi, Polynomial epidemics and
clustering in contact networks, Proceedings of the Royal
Society of London. Series B: Biological Sciences271,
10.1098/rsbl.2004.0188 (2004).
[12] G. Chowell, C. Viboud, J. M. Hyman, and L. Simonsen,
The Western Africa Ebola Virus Disease Epidemic
Exhibits Both Global Exponential and Local Polyno-
mial Growth Rates, PLoS Currents7, 10.1371/cur-
rents.outbreaks.8b55f4bad99ac5c5db3663e916803261
(2015).
[13] S. Thurner, P. Klimek, and R. Hanel, A network-based
explanation of why most COVID-19 infection curves are
linear, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
117, 22684 (2020).
[14] G. Chowell, C. Viboud, L. Simonsen, and S. M.
Moghadas, Characterizing the reproduction number of
epidemics with early subexponential growth dynamics,
Journal of The Royal Society Interface13, 20160659
(2016).
[15] M. Kiskowski and G. Chowell, Modeling household and
community transmission of Ebola virus disease: Epi-
demic growth, spatial dynamics and insights for epidemic
control, Virulence7, 163 (2016).
[16] R. Pastor-Satorras, C. Castellano, P. Van Mieghem, and
A. Vespignani, Epidemic processes in complex networks,
Reviews of Modern Physics87, 925 (2015).
[17] M. J. Keeling and K. T. Eames, Networks and epidemic
models, Journal of The Royal Society Interface2, 295
(2005).
[18] M. J. Keeling, The effects of local spatial structure on
===== PAGE 11 =====
11
epidemiological invasions, Proceedings of the Royal So-
ciety of London. Series B: Biological Sciences266, 859
(1999).
[19] E. Kenah and J. M. Robins, Second look at the spread
of epidemics on networks, Physical Review E76, 036113
(2007).
[20] B. Karrer and M. E. J. Newman, Message passing ap-
proach for general epidemic models, Physical Review E
82, 016101 (2010).
[21] M. E. J. Newman, Spread of epidemic disease on net-
works, Physical Review E66, 016128 (2002).
[22] M. Bogu˜ n´ a, I. Bonamassa, M. De Domenico, S. Havlin,
D. Krioukov, and M. ´A. Serrano, Network geometry, Na-
ture Reviews Physics3, 114 (2021).
[23] M. Bogu˜ n´ a and R. Pastor-Satorras, Class of correlated
random networks with hidden variables, Physical Review
E68, 036112 (2003).
[24] M. Bogu˜ n´ a, D. Krioukov, P. Almagro, and M.´A. Serrano,
Small worlds and clustering in spatial networks, Physical
Review Research2, 023040 (2020).
[25] S. Bhamidi, R. van der Hofstad, and G. Hooghiemstra,
First passage percolation on random graphs with finite
mean degrees, The Annals of Applied Probability20,
1907 (2010).
[26] C. F. Coletti, L. R. De Lima, A. Hinsen, B. Jahnel, and
D. Valesin, Limiting shape for first-passage percolation
models on random geometric graphs, Journal of Applied
Probability60, 1367 (2023).
V. APPENDIX
0 20 40 60 80 100
generation g
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
Rg
SI Dynamics
ERG
RGG
FIG. 6.The reproduction number per generationR g
for networks with the same basic reproduction num-
berR 0.Results are shown for the SI dynamics on Erd˝ os-
R´ enyi graphs (ERGs) and random geometric graphs (RGGs).
All networks have sizeN= 10 4 and the basic reproduction
numberR 0 ≈3. The average degree of the ERG is⟨k⟩= 3
and the average degree of RGG is⟨k⟩= 6. Results are aver-
aged over 500 runs.
0 20 40 60 80 100
generation g
0.10
0.12
0.14
0.16
0.18
0.20
mg
k=6
k=8
k=10
FIG. 7.Average fraction of neighbors infected in
the generation before the node.Results are shown for
T= 0.99. The networks are random geometric graphs. All
networks have sizeN= 10 4. Results are averaged over 200
simulation runs.