
===== PAGE 1 =====
An Empirical Analysis of Machine Learning Model and
Dataset Documentation, Supply Chain, and Licensing
Challenges on Hugging Face
TREVOR STALNAKER,William & Mary, USA
NATHAN WINTERSGILL,William & Mary, USA
OSCAR CHAPARRO,William & Mary, USA
LAURA A. HEYMANN,William & Mary, USA
MASSIMILIANO DI PENTA,University of Sannio, Italy
DANIEL M GERMAN,University of Victoria, Canada
DENYS POSHYVANYK,William & Mary, USA
The last decade has seen widespread adoption of Machine Learning (ML) components in software systems.
This has occurred in nearly every domain, from natural language processing to computer vision. These ML
components range from relatively simple neural networks to complex and resource-intensive large language
models. However, despite this widespread adoption, little is known about the supply chain relationships that
produce these models, which can have implications for compliance and security. In this work, we conducted
an extensive analysis of 760,460 models and 175,000 datasets extracted from the popular model-sharing site
Hugging Face. First, we evaluate the current state of documentation in the Hugging Face supply chain, report
real-world examples of shortcomings, and offer actionable suggestions for improvement. Next, we analyze the
underlying structure of the existing supply chain. Finally, we explore the current licensing landscape against
what was reported in previous work and discuss the unique challenges posed in this domain. Our results
motivate multiple research avenues, including the need for better license management for ML models/datasets,
better support for model documentation, and automated inconsistency checking and validation. We make our
research infrastructure and dataset available to facilitate future research.
ACM Reference Format:
Trevor Stalnaker, Nathan Wintersgill, Oscar Chaparro, Laura A. Heymann, Massimiliano Di Penta, Daniel
M German, and Denys Poshyvanyk. 2025. An Empirical Analysis of Machine Learning Model and Dataset
Documentation, Supply Chain, and Licensing Challenges on Hugging Face. 1, 1 (September 2025), 48 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn
1 INTRODUCTION
The use of machine learning (ML) models in software applications has increased dramatically over
the last decade, including in recommendation systems, computer vision, chatbots, image generation,
and automated software engineering. As creating and training new models has become increasingly
more expensive [92], developers have turned to fine-tuning pre-existing models. This approach
Authors’ addresses: Trevor Stalnaker, William & Mary, Williamsburg, VA, USA, twstalnaker@wm.edu; Nathan Wintersgill,
William & Mary, Williamsburg, VA, USA, njwintersgill@wm.edu; Oscar Chaparro, William & Mary, Williamsburg, VA,
USA, oscarch@wm.edu; Laura A. Heymann, William & Mary, Williamsburg, VA, USA, laheym@wm.edu; Massimiliano
Di Penta, University of Sannio, , Italy, dipenta@unisannio.it; Daniel M German, University of Victoria, Victoria, Canada,
dmg@uvic.ca; Denys Poshyvanyk, William & Mary, Williamsburg, VA, USA, denys@cs.wm.edu.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee
provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the
full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be honored.
Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires
prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
©2025 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM XXXX-XXXX/2025/9-ART
https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: September 2025.
arXiv:2502.04484v2  [cs.SE]  29 Sep 2025
===== PAGE 2 =====
2
Trevor Stalnaker, Nathan Wintersgill, Oscar Chaparro, Laura A. Heymann, Massimiliano Di Penta, Daniel M German,
and Denys Poshyvanyk
may save time and effort, but it also introduces the complexity of a new ML supply chain, complete
with many novel challenges.
Supply chains for conventional software typically consist of software components, libraries,
configuration files, and processes that contribute to the software [88, 109, 113]. However, for ML-
intensive systems, the typical ML supply chain is more complex, comprising all elements that
make an ML algorithm work [46, 99]. Creating a modern ML system involves the integration of ML
models and traditional software components, taking into account dependencies between models
themselves or between models and their training datasets. In addition, the training of ML models
can rely on multiple datasets or dataset aggregates, and datasets, in turn, each have their own
supply chain. Because proper license compliance requires developers to consider the permissions
granted and requirements imposed by any individual component’s license, the complexity of ML
supply chains raises new and challenging issues, particularly given that many questions remain
regarding the applicability of copyright law to generative AI [74].
Adaptation or reuse of existing models can also introduce degrees of complexity [31]. Models can
be fine-tuned [26] or quantized from existing models [48]. (Fine-tuning allows a developer to use an
existing model to create a model that specializes in certain tasks or to change the model’s behavior,
such as removing safety or ethical protections. Quantization compresses an existing model such
that it can be run on smaller hardware with minimal performance loss.) Different ML models can
be combined to form a single architecture that can, in turn, be reused or adapted [118]. Finally, the
outputs from one model can be used to train another model, such as through synthetic data [79] or
the use of distillation [56]. (Distillation is a technique where a smaller, simpler student model is
trained to mimic the behavior of a larger, more complex teacher model.)
The ML supply chain, particularly those involving generative models [ 74], is not necessarily
linear, progressing cleanly from one dependency or stage to the next. Instead, as outlined by Lee
et al.[ 74], there can be branches and even cycles in the supply chain. For example, datasets can
be used not only in the initial training of models but also for the fine-tuning of pre-existing base
models, sometimes in multiple instances and by different developers. Additionally, some stages
of the supply chain can backfeed into others, making relationships increasingly complex, if not
recursive. For example, the outputs of a generative model can be added to pre-existing datasets and
used for training future versions. The sheer volume of content from generative models makes this
situation increasingly likely, if not inevitable.
Understanding these relationships is critical not only for license compliance, which requires a
full understanding of the components used in a project and their associated licenses, but also for
detecting, mitigating, and managing security threats involved with model reuse, such as weight
poisoning attacks [ 72], data poisoning [ 50], and even malware hidden in model weights and
assembled at runtime [110].
While previous work has considered the documentation [93], evolution [65], and environmental
impact [20] of ML models, the complexity and challenges of the ML supply chain as a whole
have not yet been fully explored. The supply chain relationships between models and dependent
GitHub repositories have been explored by Pepeet al.[ 93] and Jianget al.[ 66], but the relationships
between ML models remain understudied.
To contribute to bridging this gap, we aim to investigate the emerging ML model supply chain on
Hugging Face [57] (hereafter referred to as the “ML supply chain”), specifically the documentation
practices of model owners, the structure and complexity of the supply chain itself, and the existence
and prevalence of potential license compliance issues. Launched in 2016, Hugging Face is, as of
September 2025, the largest repository of ML models and datasets [63, 65]. As with GitHub and
traditional software, Hugging Face provides a central hub for model developers and data scientists
to explore, share, and experiment with ML models. While other model forges—such as TensorFlow
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: September 2025.
===== PAGE 3 =====
An Empirical Analysis of Machine Learning Model and Dataset Documentation, Supply Chain, and Licensing Challenges
on Hugging Face 3
Hub [51], PyTorch Hub [102], and Model Zoo [71]—exist, the Hugging Face platform has the widest
reach, hosting more than 750K models and 175K datasets across many different use cases. Hugging
Face therefore represents a robust opportunity to understand ML supply chains and analyze how
developers interact with them.
We mine models and datasets hosted on Hugging Face, using the available information to
construct a supply chain graph. We highlight different types of documentation inconsistencies that
complicate the creation of this supply chain graph, discuss the underlying structure and features of
the current ML supply chain on Hugging Face, and analyze the present licensing landscape. We
note that proper documentation and documentation practices are foundational to mapping, and
thus managing, the ML supply chain. Ultimately, we demonstrate that there is still much work to
be done to facilitate better dependency/supply chain management on Hugging Face and in the ML
ecosystem.
The main contributions of this paper are the following:
•A critical evaluation of the current state of documentation on Hugging Face.
• An analysis of the interactions between models and datasets in the ML supply chain on Hugging
Face.
•An analysis of the licensing ecosystem on Hugging Face and potential compliance problems.
•An in-depth manual analysis of the top models and datasets on Hugging Face.
• Actionable suggestions for how model hubs can better facilitate supply chain management
activities.
• A cleaned, reusable, and extensible dataset of models, datasets, and their relationships, and a
tool suite capable of generating newer versions of said dataset [97].
2 BACKGROUND
In this section, we provide the background necessary to contextualize and understand our results.
Specifically, we highlight the ML supply chain, software licensing, and documentation practices for
ML components on Hugging Face.
2.1 The ML supply chain
The ML supply chain has become a complex structure with many steps and components, each
of which can affect the final output of a given model. Leeet al.[ 74] identify eight events in the
generative AI supply chain, but most apply to AI systems more broadly:
(1) The creation of expressive works that will eventually be used to train a model;
(2) The conversion of these expressive works into digital data;
(3) The compilation of these data points into training datasets;
(4) The creation of an ML model by selecting an architecture, training datasets, and a training
algorithm;
(5) The fine-tuning of existing “base” models;
(6) The deployment of the trained/fine-tuned model as a service;
(7) The use of the model to generate output, and finally
(8) Applying additional alignment to further improve the model or meet user needs.
More generally, the ML supply chain comprises various components, including datasets, models,
and traditional software. These components relate to each other in several key ways, including
data examples being collected to create a dataset, multiple datasets being aggregated to create a
composite dataset, datasets being used to train ML models, models being fine-tuned on pre-trained
base models, and models being incorporated into software projects. These complex relationships
distinguish the ML supply chain from other software supply chains: different steps in the process
of creating and deploying ML models can feed back into each other in various, nonlinear ways, as
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: September 2025.
===== PAGE 4 =====
4
Trevor Stalnaker, Nathan Wintersgill, Oscar Chaparro, Laura A. Heymann, Massimiliano Di Penta, Daniel M German,
and Denys Poshyvanyk
identified by Leeet al.[ 74], and different types of dependency relationships can relate to or build
off of the original works in different ways, as identified by Duanet al.[ 32]. Understanding how
work relates is important, as reusing any component through a supply chain can raise security
risks or licensing implications [109].
Modern ML models are also becoming increasingly complex with respect to their architectures.
For example, Mixture of Expert (MoE) models and ensemble models comprise multiple specialized
models trained by dividing the problem space into homogeneous regions [80, 101]. Recent work
has also proposed using smaller ML models to replace the hidden states within a Recurrent Neural
Network (RNN) architecture to facilitate better recall and compression of context [98]. Both exam-
ples demonstrate that understanding the relationships among models and model architectures will
become increasingly difficult.
Hugging Face, an online platform that hosts ML components, including models and datasets, has
become a central hub for those who use and create ML components, showing exponential growth
in recent years [22]. Users can download components provided by others and upload their own
components. It has become the leading registry for pre-trained models online [67], presenting new
opportunities for reusing ML components [31]. By studying the Hugging Face environment, we aim
to uncover how multiple ML components can relate to one another and consider the implications
of this critical supply chain.
2.2 Software Licensing
In the same way as other creative works, software is protected by copyright law in the United
States [5].A copyright holder has several rights under U.S. copyright law, including the right to
reproduce the work, create derivative works, distribute the work, and authorize others to engage in
these activities [6]. Although the copyright owner can transfer some or all of the rights in a work,
an owner who wishes to retain copyright while authorizing use by another party in a way that
would otherwise be infringing typically does so by means of a license, which allows the copyright
owner to impose conditions on the use [81]. In practice, developers often select pre-existing licenses
drafted by other organizations and entities rather than drafting new licenses [8, 114]. This means
that a particular license may or may not be a good fit for the subject of the license, the intended
uses, or the copyright status of the underlying work.
The licensing landscape for ML models, particularly in Hugging Face, is very diverse, including
open source licenses (such asGPLandMIT) and Creative Commons licenses, as well as new
ML-specific licenses such asOpen-RAILandLlama. These licenses broadly fall into two categories:
permissive and restrictive (sometimes called copyleft). Permissive licenses (such asMIT[4],Apache-
2.0[ 2], andCC-BY-4.0[ 23]) typically impose few restrictions, often only requiring the user to
provide notice files containing attribution or license information. On the other hand, copyleft
licenses (such as GPL [3] andCC-BY-SA-4.0[ 24]) typically require that derivative works be made
available under the same or compatible licensing (leading some to characterize such licenses as
“viral”).
ML-specific licenses follow a similar pattern, but often also impose additional restrictions on
model usage, typically involving ethical issues, limiting commercial use beyond a certain number
of active users, and prohibitions on using model output to train competing models [7, 86]. These
additional restrictions have led some to consider many ML-specific licenses as falling outside
the open-source definition [112]. In response, more new licenses—such as OpenMDW [45, 47]—
have emerged, implementing the Model Openness Framework [111], which aims to align model
development with open-source principles.
License compliance is a task with which developers often struggle [106]. These challenges are
likely heightened in the ML supply chain, given the uncertainties and ambiguities involved in
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: September 2025.
===== PAGE 5 =====
An Empirical Analysis of Machine Learning Model and Dataset Documentation, Supply Chain, and Licensing Challenges
on Hugging Face 5
interpreting OSS and CC licenses in the new ML context [32, 54]. Developers frequently treat license
compliance as a lower priority, partly due to limited enforcement [114]. However, non-compliance
can lead to financial [ 52, 104], legal [ 9, 11, 19, 27], and reputational [ 28, 53] consequences for
developers and organizations, particularly organizations of sufficient size and prominence to attract
attention for non-compliance. More specifically, to the extent that a licensed work is protected by
copyright law, use beyond the scope of the license may constitute copyright infringement, which
can result in litigation by the licensor, demands for payment or other remedies, and/or undesirable
publicity that affects the licensee’s standing in the community.
2.3 ML component documentation
Comprehensive component documentation is essential to understanding the ML supply chain and
maintaining license compliance. This need has become increasingly critical as the complexity of
the components and the processes involved in their creation and deployment continue to grow.
However, ML components do not always disclose data sources, making it difficult to comply
with or keep track of all licensing obligations associated with each component [ 55]. This can
create conditions that lead to legal disputes over the use of copyrighted material in training ML
models [108], including not only the use of copyrighted works for training without permission but
also the use of the generations of one model to train another model, an activity that may not have
been permissible under that model’s licensing terms [82].
Model cards [85] have become the standard method for sharing information about ML models
hosted on Hugging Face [42], including intended uses, limitations, and datasets used in training
[41]. Although tools are in development to streamline the process [ 43], model card creation on
Hugging Face is primarily a manual process in which a user enters documentation about a model
into a predefined markdown template [ 36]. This template is robust, including fields for model
description, uses, bias, limitations, testing, and optional fields for citation, technical specifications,
and environmental impact. However, the manual nature of documentation introduces a significant
potential for human error, ambiguity, and incompleteness [64, 66]. In fact, the quality and adoption
of model cards remain low [ 16], despite user studies and other efforts by Hugging Face [ 34] to
improve the situation, and despite researchers proposing tools such as DocML [16] to create and
evolve model cards.
3 RELATED WORK
Hugging Face has been studied in recent years to investigate the maintenance and evolution of ML
models [22], security risks in the ML supply chain [65], the carbon footprint of ML models [21],
and the documentation of ML datasets and models [77, 91, 93].
3.1 Model and dataset documentation
Previous research has identified several documentation shortcomings on Hugging Face. Works by
Oreamunoet al.and Jianget al.highlight that the majority of models and datasets hosted on Hugging
Face lack documentation and that less-popular components are more likely to have incomplete
documentation [63, 91]. Additional studies have explored the fields most likely to be missing from
the dataset documentation [119], the presence and quality of the license information [77, 93], and
the documentation of known model biases [93]. In addition, some studies have considered other
deficiencies, such as poorly chosen or erroneous model names (e.g., nonadherence to conventional
naming schemes that lead to confusion) [60, 61].
We build on these previous analyses by identifyingspecificandpreviously unreporteddocu-
mentation failures, such as component reference ambiguities, encountered in our analysis of the
ML supply chain on Hugging Face (Section 5). Our detailed analysis and enumeration of specific,
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: September 2025.
===== PAGE 6 =====
6
Trevor Stalnaker, Nathan Wintersgill, Oscar Chaparro, Laura A. Heymann, Massimiliano Di Penta, Daniel M German,
and Denys Poshyvanyk
concrete examples of incomplete and erroneous documentation go beyond previous work. These
real-world observations can help model owners avoid common documentation pitfalls, empower
model hubs to implement automated checks for common errors, and make researchers aware of
potential noise in data mined from Hugging Face.
3.2 The ML supply chain
By analyzing discussion forums and a mining study of Hugging Face, Taraghiet al.[ 100] identified
various challenges and benefits associated with model reuse. However, they did not explicitly
examine the dependency relationships that result from reuse. Other studies, such as those by Pepe
et al.[ 93] and Jianget al.[ 66], have primarily focused on the relationship between models and
downstream GitHub repositories that utilize those models. In contrast, our work instead focuses on
the relationships among pre-trained/base models,dependent models, and datasets. While Joneset al.
do consider model-to-model relationships, they stop short of constructing a comprehensive supply
chain graph [67]. We extend this line of research by constructing such a graph and conducting a
robust statistical analysis of its structure. We also conduct a detailed manual review of the most
popular models (Section 8) and datasets hosted on Hugging Face (Section 9).
3.3 Software Licensing
Much previous work has investigated software licensing for traditional software, including software
licensing issues [69, 106, 115] and practitioners’ understanding of software licensing [8, 114]. More
recently, some work has investigated the licensing issues that arise when ML components are used
by open-source projects. Works by Pepeet al.[ 93] and Jianget al.[ 66] explore model licensing
on Hugging Face, primarily reporting the presence of licensing information as well as the usage
frequencies for those licenses. In the case of Jianget al.[ 66], this was done as a short demonstration
illustrating the utility of their PEATMOSS dataset. Both works also consider the interplay of model
licenses with the licenses of dependent GitHub repositories. Neither work, however, evaluates
license incompatibilities between models or between models and datasets, as we do in this work.
We extend these prior works by collecting and analyzing more recent data, which reflects the
current state of model/dataset licensing.
The work of Duanet al.[ 32] proposes a tool (ModelGo) and framework for identifying potential
license compliance issues involving ML components but provides only artificial examples and offers
no empirical analysis of the prevalence of the potential problems in practice. Instead, we consider
real-world examples of potential license conflicts and offer a rich, empirical analysis, including a
report of license usage statistics, an examination of the frequencies of license differences between
parent and children models, and thorough case-studies on a sample of the top models and datasets
from Hugging Face. We further expand on prior work by considering various license classes,
multi-licensing, and failing to comply with license-imposed naming requirements.
3.4 Summary
In conclusion, while our study builds on the basis of prior work [ 20, 60, 62–64, 91, 93, 100, 119],
our investigation focuses on the structure and characteristics of the ML supply chain itself and
the challenges encountered in managing it. More specifically, while previous work examined
deficiencies in documentation and licensing at the level of individual models, we investigate the ML
supply chain at a higher level by examining how it is structured and how models relate. Additionally,
where previous work has examined the relationships between projects and models, we examine the
relationships among multiple models. Thus, our work is beneficial not only to software developers,
as is the case for prior work, but also to data scientists, ML engineers, and anyone who wants to
reuse models with complex dependencies. By providing an ecosystem-level examination of the ML
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: September 2025.
===== PAGE 7 =====
An Empirical Analysis of Machine Learning Model and Dataset Documentation, Supply Chain, and Licensing Challenges
on Hugging Face 7
supply chain, we provide these groups with the information necessary to understand how models
relate to one another and evolve, licensing concerns regarding ML components on Hugging Face,
and potential challenges one can face regarding model documentation.
4 STUDY METHODOLOGY
Thegoalof this study was to evaluate the current state of documentation, structure, and licensing
of the ML supply chain. The studycontextconsisted of 760,460 models and 175,000 datasets mined
from Hugging Face. We aim to address the following research questions (RQs):
RQ0: What documentation deficiencies exist in Hugging Face model and data cards that potentially
complicate mapping the ML supply chain?To understand the ML supply chain on Hugging
Face, we needed to collect and analyze Hugging Face metadata. Using these data, we identified
several issues and challenges related to documentation that introduced hurdles to obtaining a
comprehensive understanding of the ecosystem. We examine these challenges in detail because
with poorly and inconsistently described models and datasets, developers may struggle to
leverage the ML supply chain effectively. This preliminary research question discusses examples
of noisiness issues occurring in the Hugging Face model and the data set documentation.
RQ1: What is the structure of the ML supply chain?The ML supply chain, like any other supply
chain, is characterized by dependencies across components. This research question looks at the
complexities of such a dependency graph.
RQ2: What is the current licensing landscape for models and datasets and what potential compliance
challenges does it pose?ML models are software, so software licenses govern their use and
redistribution. As such, these models present new challenges in the area of license compliance.
To understand these challenges, we examine the state of licensing in the ML supply chain on
Hugging Face by 1) analyzing common licenses and license categories, 2) exploring licensing
decisions made in the supply chain, and 3) investigating potential compliance challenges, such
as incompatibilities between parent/child model licenses, ambiguities introduced by undeclared,
unknown, or custom licenses, and uncertainty surrounding how license terms apply in context.
In the following subsections, we describe the study methodology, which is depicted in Fig. 1. We
start by mining model and dataset lists. Next, for each model/dataset, we extract information neces-
sary to construct the ML supply chain graph, recording and analyzing documentation deficiencies
encountered during the process (𝑅𝑄0). Then we systematically analyze and evaluate the structure
of the resulting supply chain graph (𝑅𝑄1). The same graph, along with the licensing information, is
then used to address𝑅𝑄 2.
4.1 Data collection
To answer the research questions, we used the Hugging Face API to extract a list of all models
publicly hosted on the platform. An initial list of 500,000 models was pulled on July 9, 2024, and
a full list of all available models was obtained on July 11, 2024. Using the same APIs, we mined
data (model cards and metadata) for each model on this list. For models that were unavailable
through the API (as described in Section 5.1), we employed a web-scraping technique relying on a
combination of Python’s request module and the BeautifulSoup HTML parser. Mining took place
between July 9 and July 12, 2024, yielding 760,460 mined models. We also used the Hugging Face
API to gather the list of all datasets publicly hosted on the platform and available through the API
as of July 9, 2024. For each model in our dataset, information on base models and datasets was
obtained, when available, from theCardDataattribute of the model metadata as well as from the
model tags. We make all the raw data acquired from mining available in our replication package
[97].
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: September 2025.
===== PAGE 8 =====
8
Trevor Stalnaker, Nathan Wintersgill, Oscar Chaparro, Laura A. Heymann, Massimiliano Di Penta, Daniel M German,
and Denys Poshyvanyk
Mine Model List
Mine Dataset List
Webscraping
Clean and
Standardize Data
Create Supply
Chain Graph
Extract Lineage
Chains (paths)
RQ0: State of
Documentation
RQ1: Structure
of Supply Chain
RQ2: State
of Licensing
API
Mine Model Data
+
Quantitative
& Qualitative
Analysis
Quantitative
& Qualitative
Analysis
Quantitative
& Qualitative
Analysis
Fig. 1. Study Methodology
Although there are a handful of research datasets for Hugging Face models and datasets already
exist [64, 66], we opted to create our own dataset for this work for three reasons:
(1) We aimed to analyze the most current data, which includes new models and model families (e.g.,
new models recently added to the Llama family of models) and changes in licensing frequencies
(see Section 7). The presence of these new models is significant given that many of these were the
first open-weight models capable of competing with the, until then, assumed more powerful and
untouchable proprietary options (e.g., OpenAI’s Chat-GPT, Google’s Gemini, and Anthropic’s
Claude). The practical utility of these new models represented a paradigm shift for fine-tuning,
reusing, and remixing existing open-weight models. Their inclusion is essential to understand
the present state of the ML supply chain on Hugging Face.
(2) We aimed to collect and analyze a more comprehensive and complete dataset; as shown in
Table 1, our dataset is significantly larger than most existing datasets and comprises both
datasets and models.
(3) Unlike Jianget al.[ 66] and Pepeet al.[ 93], we were not focused on model-to-GitHub repository
dependencies; accordingly, we aimed to design a dataset tailored for mapping model-to-model
and dataset-to-model dependencies.
4.2 Data normalization and cleaning
Once the data for models and datasets were downloaded, the data needed to be cleaned, standardized,
and stored in a more usable form. This process involved standardizing the names of declared
base models and datasets and mapping to unique identifiers where possible. For example,xlm-
roberta-baseis a shorthand forFacebookAI/xlm-roberta-base, which has the unique internal
ID621ffdc036468d709f174364. We relied on Hugging Face’s internal mechanisms to resolve short
names where possible. For example, attempting to load the model page forxlm-roberta-baseon
Hugging Face redirects to the page forFacebookAI/xlm-roberta-base. Additionally, we resolved
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: September 2025.
===== PAGE 9 =====
An Empirical Analysis of Machine Learning Model and Dataset Documentation, Supply Chain, and Licensing Challenges
on Hugging Face 9
Table 1. Comparison of study goals and Hugging Face (HF) datasets used in prior work
Work Models Datasets Study Goal(s)
[119] - 24,065 Explore the state of dataset documentation on HF
[60] 500 - Investigate PTM* naming practices/anomolies on HF
[64] 15,913 - Create a dataset for future research
[91] 55,280 6,758 Understand the state of model documentation practices
[63] 63,182 - Understand model reuse, developer workflow, and challenges
[93] 159,132 - Study extent to which model maintainers document PTMs
[100] 239,422 - Understand challenges faced during PTM reuse
[62] / [66] 281,638 - Create a dataset examining relationship between PTMs and OSS
[20] / [22] 380,000 - Provide guide for researchers/explore how models are maintained
This work 760,460 175,000Explore structure of ML supply chain and licensing challenges
*Pre-Trained Model
inconsistencies in field inputs. For example, [], “”, andNonewere all being used to denote no
declared licenses. We standardized these variations to the empty list to make later computations
simpler. We further elaborate on documentation challenges that required special attention and
resolution in our discussion ofRQ 0.
4.3 Extracting licensing information
We extracted licensing information from the tags present in model metadata. While licenses can
also be declared in theCardDataattribute of the model metadata, we found through an analysis
of our dataset that the tags were more complete in every instance than theCardDataattribute. In
nearly all instances where licensing information was present, it was found in both locations (99.9%).
However, for 0.1% of models, the licensing information could be found exclusively in the tags, and
there were no instances that relied only on theCardDataattribute. We also looked for discrepancies
in the cases where both locations were utilized. We identified only 134 discrepancies, and in all cases,
an additional license was declared in the tags that was not declared in theCardData. As there were
no irreconcilable differences (i.e., the tags declared anMITlicense while theCardDataattribute
declared aGPLlicense), we concluded that the model tags are the most complete machine-readable
source for licensing information.
Although licensing information can also be found in sections of a model card that are more
difficult to programmatically extract from, we sought to further confirm that reliance on tags to
identify the declared license used by the model was justified. Accordingly, one author manually
reviewed the model cards for the top 100 models (sorted by number of downloads) marked as
having no license in the tags. We anticipated that these 100 models were more likely to have
complete and reliable documentation because of their popularity as compared with other models
in our dataset, consistent with the findings of Joneset al.[ 67]. From this sample of 100 models, we
identified only 16 models that had declared licensing information elsewhere. Of those, one had
licensing information added to its tags after our initial mining, bringing the total to 15 models.
For nine of these models, the license could only be found transitively by following a link to the
model’s associated GitHub page. Table 2 provides a more detailed breakdown of where the licensing
information was located for each example.
Detecting license declarations present in other sources (e.g., plain text or links to external sites)
would involve more complicated mining techniques, such as those that could traverse external
links, and would require NLP-based approaches that extract licensing information from the text.
These NLP approaches would have to not only recognize license names, which may not be in
a standardized form, but also pattern-match embedded license text. An LLM tool, like the one
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: September 2025.
===== PAGE 10 =====
10
Trevor Stalnaker, Nathan Wintersgill, Oscar Chaparro, Laura A. Heymann, Massimiliano Di Penta, Daniel M German,
and Denys Poshyvanyk
Table 2. License Information Location for Sample with No Tags after Manual Review
Location Count Percent
Link to GitHub 9 56.3%
License referenced in README 2 12.5%
License text embedded in README 2 12.5%
LICENSE File 2 12.5%
License in tags (added after mining) 1 6.3%
Total 16 100.0%
employed by Jianget al.[ 66], could potentially be used to extract licensing information, but at
a high cost (between $0.01 and $0.03 per model—or between $7,000 and $22,800 for our dataset).
Relatedly, relying on a cheaper but smaller, locally hosted LLM would risk introducing hallucinated
license information and so still require laborious manual human oversight. To ensure that our
analysis captured the most accurate information possible and to better understand the formal
documentation structure of Hugging Face, rather than employ such an approach, we focus on
explicitly declared licenses. Given the likelihood that licenses are declared in tags, the infeasibility
of manual annotation for all examples, and the inherent difficulties of automatically obtaining
license information from anywhere in a model card, our reliance on tags for license detection
appears to be an acceptable approach. Additionally, existing supply chain analysis tools rely heavily
on machine-readable metadata, so we further justify that this is the appropriate locus of analysis
given that the ultimate audience for such tools is the end user.
4.4 Data analysis
To addressRQ 0, we quantitatively and qualitatively analyzed and discussed the different types
of documentation issues that we observed in our attempt to understand the ML supply chain on
Hugging Face.
Once the dataset had been cleaned, to addressRQ 1, we used the networkx Python library [87]
to create a directed graph representing the observable ML supply chain. Due to the inherent issues
and incompleteness of model documentation, this graph, by its nature, only represents a subset of
the total ML supply chain on Hugging Face. Each node in the graph represents a distinct model,
and an edge represents a dependency relationship. For example, if model𝐴 listed model𝐵 as a base
model, there would be an edge from𝐵 to𝐴. We would describe model𝐵 as the parent of model𝐴
and model𝐴as the child of model𝐵. That is, model𝐴is derived from model𝐵.
For the sake of analysis, we flatten the individual model supply chains by extracting all longest
paths (i.e., lineage chains) from the graph that go from source nodes to sinks. Each of these paths
goes from a root base model to a model at the end of the ML supply chain (i.e., a leaf node with no
dependents or outgoing connections— no other models are derived from this model).
Using the paths resulting fromRQ 1, we addressedRQ 2 by analyzing the state of licensing in
the ML supply chain, developing scripts and heuristics to look for parent/child license differences
and potential license compliance problems related to model/dataset dependencies. We define a
parent/child license differenceto refer to the difference between the license(s) of a parent and a child
model/dataset. Assume, for example, that model𝐵 is the child of model𝐴. If model𝐵 was licensed
underMITand model 𝐴 underApache-2.0, we would say there is a parent/child license difference
between𝐴 and𝐵. We avoid stronger terms such as “inconsistencies” and “incompatibilities, ” since
some of these differences may in fact be compatible with licensing terms. This is consistent with
prior work [32] that found that the application of licensing terms, particularly for existing licenses,
in the novel ML context can introduce uncertainties and ambiguities in terms of legal interpretation.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: September 2025.
===== PAGE 11 =====
An Empirical Analysis of Machine Learning Model and Dataset Documentation, Supply Chain, and Licensing Challenges
on Hugging Face 11
Fig. 2. Example of model gated behind Terms of Service requirement
Two authors reviewed all distinct licenses in our dataset and grouped them into six categories,
which can provide the basis for future research into license compatibility and licensing trends in
the ML supply chain.
All scripts used for mining, data clean-up, and analysis can be found in our replication pack-
age [97] and can be used to foster further research in this area.
5 RQ 0: DOCUMENTATION CHALLENGES ENCOUNTERED ON HUGGING FACE
In this section, we outline and discuss documentation issues that were observed on the Hugging Face
platform while mapping connections in the observed ML supply chain. Specifically, this preliminary
RQ outlines the observed shortcomings and challenges to 1) elaborate potential pitfalls future
researchers may face in mining Hugging Face and 2) to more thoroughly report documentation
issues extant on Hugging Face that have been left unexplored by prior work.
5.1 Inability to Access Metadata
Not all model metadata was accessible through the Hugging Face API. There were 7,258 model cards
(0.95%) that had to be scraped using a combination of Python’s requests [94] and BeautifulSoup
[14] libraries. The most frequent challenge, found in 99.4% of these cases, resulted from gating
based on the acceptance of terms and conditions (see Figure 2). This was particularly the case for
models owned by or relying on models created by larger entities such as Google or Meta. Twenty-
two models and their metadata were gated behind age restrictions imposed by the model owner∗,
requiring a Hugging Face account to access. Accessing the full repository, and thus metadata,
required logging in with a Hugging Face account and then, in most cases, providing an email
address. These hurdles to accessing the metadata for a model could potentially complicate the
creation of fully automated analyzers and ML/AIBOM (Machine Learning/Artificial Intelligence
Bill of Materials) [12, 13, 96, 116] generators for an ML supply chain, which we believe should not
rely on scraping potentially changing HTML content or on Selenium-based web-drivers for form
completion and navigation.
5.2 Incomplete Metadata
We saw, consistent with prior work [63, 64, 66, 91], that the documentation provided by model
owners on Hugging Face is often incomplete. This is a trend not just for smaller, infrequently used
projects but also for large projects with tens of thousands of downloads. For example, OpenAI’s
clip-vit-large-patch14-336model, with 5,827,027 downloads, has a model card that is almost
entirely incomplete, save for basic hyper-parameter and framework version information [89]. Only
∗Throughout the paper, by "model owner", we refer to the entity that uploaded the model to Hugging Face. We make no
claims as to whether that entity had the legal right to do so or if they are the original author/creator of the model.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: September 2025.
===== PAGE 12 =====
12
Trevor Stalnaker, Nathan Wintersgill, Oscar Chaparro, Laura A. Heymann, Massimiliano Di Penta, Daniel M German,
and Denys Poshyvanyk
37.8% of models and 27.6% of datasets declared any kind of licensing information in a standardized,
machine-readable way. We discuss the prevalence of declared components further in Section 6.
Some models may provide information on training data and architecture by linking to scientific
papers that include these details, but such a practice introduces an additional hurdle in easily
and programmatically obtaining that data, contributing to the ML reproducibility crisis [59]. Ulti-
mately, the reason why many models do not even mention the datasets used would require further
investigation, including interviewing/surveying developers, which is out of the scope of this work.
During the manual analysis of 100 model cards described in Section 4.3, we observed two
examples where the Hugging Face team wrote documentation on behalf of model owners. The
first instance was an image-to-text model uploaded by Microsoft with the disclaimer: “The team
releasing TrOCR did not write a model card for this model so this model card has been written
by the Hugging Face team” [83]. The second was a larger version of the same model, also owned
by Microsoft [84]. In both cases, the models were described by a research paper and released on
GitHub. Understanding the criteria that the Hugging Face team uses to determine when and how
to intervene with model cards requires further investigation, but we do note that according to a
blog written by members of the Hugging Face team, they created/updated model cards in some
instances to inform design decisions surrounding a new model card template [33].
5.3 The “Unknown” license
The Hugging Face platform’s documentation provides a list of recognized licenses each with
a unique, standardized short-hand identifier that can be utilized by users when creating their
model/data cards [35]. This list includes common Open Source Software (OSS), Creative Commons
(CC), and ML-specific licenses as well as an “Other” catch-all category that encompasses less
common, custom, or modified licenses not included in Hugging Face’s predefined license list. An
“Unknown” licensing option is also provided, but there is no guidance provided as to when this
option should be selected. Future work will need to explore when and why model owners select this
option, particularly given that acknowledging that the license is “Unknown” suggests, at best, a lack
of due diligence or understanding on the part of the owner or, at worst, that the model/dataset raises
copyright infringement issues. We observed 4,419 (1.5%) models and 2,194 (4.5%) datasets that used
this “Unknown” license tag, which inherently raises compliance challenges for dependent models.
5.4 Naming problems
Hugging Face users primarily use human-readable names, not unique identifiers, when supplying
the metadata information for their base models/datasets. Unique identifiers do exist for all models
and datasets on Hugging Face, but we did not observe any instances where this information was
being used by model/dataset owners when referring to models or datasets they depended on.
Instead, these references typically, but not always, followed the “owner/model” naming convention.
For example, a model owner would refer to a base model as “FacebookAI/xlm-roberta-base” and
not by its unique Hugging Face ID: 621ffdc036468d709f174364. This is problematic because these
model references are not automatically updated when name changes occur. A change to the model,
dataset, or owner name results in a new human-readable identifier that no longer matches the
previous references to the model/dataset. As a result, documentation can easily become outdated,
unhelpful, and potentially confusing.
We observed 596 models that had their human-readable identifiers changed. Instances such
as222gate/Blurdus-7b-v0.1→ gate369/Blurdus-7b-v0.1involve a change to the name of the
model owner. Other instances, such asaaditya/openbiollm-llama3-70b → aaditya/Llama3-
OpenBioLLM-70B, involve a change to the model name itself. In both cases, manual effort is required
to track down and map the new names to the original references, which can make dependency
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: September 2025.
===== PAGE 13 =====
An Empirical Analysis of Machine Learning Model and Dataset Documentation, Supply Chain, and Licensing Challenges
on Hugging Face 13
Table 3. Top 10 Most Common Model Names in the Ecosystem
Model Name Count
ppo-LunarLander-v2 5,660
q-FrozenLake-v1-4x4-noSlippery 4,200
test 3,900
ppo-Huggy 2,684
dqn-SpaceInvadersNoFrameskip-v4 2,405
distilbert-base-uncased-finetuned-emotion 2,348
my_awesome_model 1,727
q-Taxi-v3 1,535
ppo-SnowballTarget 1,513
bert-finetuned-ner 1,297
management tasks increasingly difficult. Often the only way to determine the correct mapping is by
relying on Hugging Face to redirect the page associated with a former name to the one associated
with the most current name. This suggests that Hugging Face maintains some internal mapping,
but it is unclear how long this mapping persists or what might happen in the event of a name
collision.
Model names, without the additional owner information, are not guaranteed to be unique. Similar
to how repository forks have the same name (but different owners) on GitHub, fine-tuned or forked
models may also have the same name yet different owners on Hugging Face. For this reason,
developers often specify models using the “owner/model” naming convention described previously.
If this happens consistently, ambiguities can be avoided. However, we observed 16,477 cases where
developers referred to base models only by the model name, excluding owner information. For
example, a developer might use “roberta-base” to refer to “FacebookAI/roberta-base. ” While it could
be reasonable to assume that this shorthand refers to the popular model, this may not be the case:
in our dataset, there were 39 other models also named “roberta-base, ” all with different owners.
Table 3 shows the top 10 most common model names in the Hugging Face ecosystem and their
frequencies. If one of these models were referred to by name only, it would be nearly impossible
to determine which model was being referenced. For example, more than 5,600 models share the
model name “ppo-LunarLander-v2. ” While many of these are likely toy models or “Hello World”
equivalents, others, such asdistilbert-base-uncased-finetuned-emotion, might suggest the
need for widespread adoption of unique model identifiers.
5.5 Missing or nonsensical references
There were 34,159 instances where we were unable to map a declared dataset (e.g., a dataset that
a model reported relying on for training) to a dataset found publicly on Hugging Face. These
consisted of 4,755 unique declarations. It is impossible to know with certainty, but such declarations
likely consist of datasets that have been removed or made private, are from external sources, are
actually dataset descriptors, contain typos, or, in some cases, are Hugging Face usernames.
We were also unable to map 2,501 base model declarations to known IDs, representing a possible
1,371 unique missing models in total. As with the datasets, these models may have been removed,
made private, renamed in a way difficult to trace, or may reference a model outside the ecosystem.
It is also possible that developer typos result in the inability to identify the models.
In other cases, some of the references were nonsensical. In our analysis of the graph of all
collected components in the ML supply chain (described further in Section 6), we detected 684
cycles in total, including 675 (98.7%) trivial cycles in which a model declares itself as a base model,
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: September 2025.
===== PAGE 14 =====
14
Trevor Stalnaker, Nathan Wintersgill, Oscar Chaparro, Laura A. Heymann, Massimiliano Di Penta, Daniel M German,
and Denys Poshyvanyk
despite the fact that a model should not be able to be its own ancestor. All of this further motivates
the need to use unique and standardized identifiers when referring to models and datasets, as well
as a need for validating reference information.
5.6 Models as datasets
We observed 1,416 instances in which a model was listed as a dataset in thedatasetsfield. In
other words, a model reference was included in the metadata field specific to training datasets.
Without more information, it is impossible to know whether this indicates a mistake on the part of
the model owner or that the output of the declared model was somehow used for training.
5.7 Shortcomings of Hugging Face
While base models are declared by some model owners, in many cases, the precise relationship
between a derived model and its base model is left ambiguous, at least in the available metadata.
Hugging Face does provide a separate field for architecture relationships, but there is no standardized
way to specify situations involving fine-tuning, quantization, or using outputs for training. This
ambiguity can have significant consequences since, particularly in the licensing context, the nature
of the relationship is important in determining how licensing terms should be applied. For example,
it is permissible to use a model licensed under thellama3license for fine-tuning but impermissible
to use its outputs to train a competing model [ 82]. Additional fields specifying the nature of
relationships between models would be useful, but their inclusion would also introduce additional
administrative burden for model owners.
While uncommon and not a direct shortcoming of Hugging Face, we observed examples where
model owners would declare the same dataset or base model multiple times (i.e., the same mod-
el/dataset had multiple entries in the respective metadata field). Specifically, 178 models declared
a dataset at least twice, and 310 models declared a base model at least twice. One model, with
otherwise robust documentation, declared the same base model 64 times. Again, while there are few
instances of this duplication, they still serve as something of a canary in the coal mine, indicating a
lack of validation on behalf of Hugging Face.
5.8 Summary
In summary, we identified numerous challenges while gathering data from Hugging Face, ranging
from incomplete model information to the inability to access existing data. We highlight the
prevalence of these issues to alert others seeking to mine Hugging Face and to identify specific
areas for improvement, both from those documenting their models on Hugging Face and for any
future efforts to improve Hugging Face’s system.
6 RQ 1: ANALYSIS OF THE ML SUPPLY CHAIN
Despite the challenges outlined inRQ 0, we were still able to construct an ecosystem-level supply
chain graph mapping the relationships between models and datasets. While we acknowledge that
our supply chain graph represents only a subset of the total components in the full Hugging Face
ecosystem, as noted previously, we believe that it is appropriate to rely on it to make observations
about recurring trends and patterns.
To analyze the structure of the ML supply chain on Hugging Face, we began by addressing the
issues identified inRQ 0 using different strategies depending on the issue. Where possible, we
employed web-scraping techniques to pull metadata for models that were inaccessible through the
Hugging Face API (Section 5.1). Models where even this analysis was impossible were excluded
from the analysis. We standardized model/dataset names, preferring the unique Hugging Face ID
(Section 5.4). Where naming ambiguities were present (multiple models with the same name, but
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: September 2025.
===== PAGE 15 =====
An Empirical Analysis of Machine Learning Model and Dataset Documentation, Supply Chain, and Licensing Challenges
on Hugging Face 15
Table 4. Top 10 Models by Likes
Model Pipeline Likes License
runwayml/stable-diffusion-v1-5 text-to-image 10,987 creativeml-openrail-m
CompVis/stable-diffusion-v1-4 text-to-image 6,358 creativeml-openrail-m
stabilityai/stable-diffusion-xl-base-1.0 text-to-image 5,502 openrail++
meta-llama/Meta-Llama-3-8B text-generation 5,200 llama3
bigscience/bloom text-generation 4,647 bigscience-bloom-rail-1.0
meta-llama/Llama-2-7b text-generation 3,980 llama2
mistralai/Mixtral-8x7B-Instruct-v0.1 text-generation 3,960 apache-2.0
stabilityai/stable-diffusion-2-1 text-to-image 3,778 openrail++
WarriorMama777/OrangeMixs text-to-image 3,714 creativeml-openrail-m
meta-llama/Llama-2-7b-chat-hf text-generation 3,670 llama2
Table 5. Top 10 Models by Downloads
Model Pipeline Downloads License
MIT/ast-finetuned-audioset-10-10-0.4593 audio-classification 677,161,532 bsd-3-clause
sentence-transformers/all-MiniLM-L12-v2 sentence-similarity 83,805,061 apache-2.0
facebook/fasttext-language-identification text-classification 53,517,573 cc-by-nc-4.0
google-bert/bert-base-uncased fill-mask 52,724,375 apache-2.0
sentence-transformers/all-MiniLM-L6-v2 sentence-similarity 41,281,684 apache-2.0
openai/clip-vit-large-patch14 zero-shot-image-classification 40,114,370 -
distilbert/distilbert-base-uncased fill-mask 24,195,717 apache-2.0
openai/whisper-small automatic-speech-recognition 23,317,804 -
jonatasgrosman/wav2vec2-large-xlsr-53-english automatic-speech-recognition 18,212,315 apache-2.0
openai/clip-vit-base-patch16 zero-shot-image-classification 16,999,162 -
different owners), we assumed the most popular model (Section 5.4). References that could not be
mapped to existing models/datasets on Hugging Face were also excluded from analysis (Section 5.5).
Models that were listed as datasets were excluded from the dataset analysis (Section 5.6).
6.1 Most popular models and datasets
We begin with an overview of the landscape by describing the most popular models and datasets.
We measure popularity in terms of engagement via the metrics provided by Hugging Face: likes and
recent downloads. These metrics also serve our goal of capturing the current state of the ecosystem
by highlighting what models and datasets are currently being engaged with. Tables 4 and 5 show
the ten most engaged with models in our dataset by these metrics. Organizations such as OpenAI
and Meta occupy several top positions. The models span a variety of use cases, including image
and text generation.
Similarly, Tables 6 and 7 display the most engaged with datasets. The most commonTaskfield is
“Question Answering” for the most downloaded datasets and “Text Generation” for the most liked
datasets. However, a variety ofData ModalitiesandTasksare represented across both groups. For
example,Data Modalitiesincluded both text and images, whileTasksincluded other specifics such
as “Token Classification. ” In fact, the most liked dataset by far,fka/awesome-chatgpt-prompt, is
a repository of curated ChatGPT prompts rather than a training dataset for models, which suggests
that it may be more prudent to examine download count to determine the most popular datasets.
This is further supported by the download count’s correlation with the number of client projects
on GitHub [93].
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: September 2025.
===== PAGE 16 =====
16
Trevor Stalnaker, Nathan Wintersgill, Oscar Chaparro, Laura A. Heymann, Massimiliano Di Penta, Daniel M German,
and Denys Poshyvanyk
Table 6. Top 10 Datasets by Likes
Dataset Declared task Size Likes License
fka/awesome-chatgpt-prompts Question Answering <1K 5,011 cc0-1.0
HuggingFaceFW/fineweb Text Generation 10B-100B 1,539 odc-by
Open-Orca/OpenOrca Text Classification 1M-10M 1,269 mit
OpenAssistant/oasst1 - 10K-100K 1,232 apache-2.0
gsdf/EasyNegative - <1K 1,128 other
Anthropic/hh-rlhf - 100K-1M 1,092 mit
togethercomputer/RedPajama-Data-1T Text Generation 1M-10M 1,025 -
Nerfgun3/bad_prompt - <1K 921 creativeml-openrail-m
tiiuae/falcon-refinedweb Text Generation 100M-1B 765 odc-by
allenai/dolma Text Generation >1T 752 odc-by
Table 7. Top 10 Datasets by Downloads
Dataset Declared task Size Downloads License
hails/mmlu_no_train Question Answering -* 16,146,384 mit
lighteval/mmlu Question Answering 1M-10M 5,882,652 mit
argilla/databricks-dolly-15k-curated-en - 10K-100K 4,671,897 -
ceval/ceval-exam Text Classification 10K-100K 2,111,340 -
lavita/medical-qa-shared-task-v1-toy - <1K 1,792,638 -
lukaemon/bbh - 1K-10K 911,736 -
haonan-li/cmmlu Multiple Choice/Question Answering 10K-100K 633,608 cc-by-nc-4.0
chansung/requested-arxiv-ids-3 - <1K 587,249 -
cais/mmlu Question Answering 100K-1M 555,115 mit
allenai/ai2_arc Question Answering 1K-10K 543,678 cc-by-sa-4.0
* No size is provided since the dataset requires Python code execution
6.2 Most depended upon datasets and base models
Our ability to evaluate the ML supply chain relies on the dependency information provided by
model owners. On Hugging Face, this information is found in the model metadata, where model
owners declare base models and datasets. Although many models on Hugging Face were not created
independently, we note that only 117,245 out of 760,460 models (15.4%) declare any base model
and, of these, most (111,568 | 95.2%) declare only one base model. Overall, most models do not
declare any base models: with respect to the number of base models declared, the average, as well
as the minimum, first quartile, median, and third quartile, are all 0. The maximum is 53 unique base
models.
Table 8 lists the ten models that were most frequently declared as a base model by the models in
our dataset,i.e., the models that were most frequently cited as dependencies by other models. They
exhibit a varying number of likes and downloads and primarily come from large providers such
as Meta, Google, and OpenAI. Notably, none of these models declare that they are derived from
Table 8. Top 10 Declared Base Models
Base Model Times Used Likes Downloads Pipeline License
distilbert/distilbert-base-uncased 5,240 463 24,195,717 fill-mask apache-2.0
stabilityai/stable-diffusion-xl-base-1.0 4,776 5,502 3,558,713 text-to-image openrail++
runwayml/stable-diffusion-v1-5 2,438 10,987 3,790,115 text-to-image creativeml-openrail-m
openai-community/gpt2 2,405 2,076 6,888,015 text-generation mit
unsloth/llama-3-8b-bnb-4bit 2,363 141 486,478 text-generation llama2
FacebookAI/xlm-roberta-base 2,169 526 6,196,387 fill-mask mit
mistralai/Mistral-7B-v0.1 2,099 3,290 706,043 text-generation apache-2.0
google-bert/bert-base-uncased 1,576 1,665 52,724,375 fill-mask apache-2.0
google-bert/bert-base-cased 1,472 235 5,191,167 fill-mask apache-2.0
openai/whisper-small 1,469 180 23,317,804 speech-recognition apache-2.0
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: September 2025.
===== PAGE 17 =====
An Empirical Analysis of Machine Learning Model and Dataset Documentation, Supply Chain, and Licensing Challenges
on Hugging Face 17
Table 9. Top 10 Declared Datasets
Dataset Times Used Likes Downloads License
nyu-mll/glue 2,293 336 122,473 other
rajpurkar/squad 1,827 228 11,379 cc-by-sa-4.0
dair-ai/emotion 1,766 257 23,236 other
ilsvrc/imagenet-1k 1,470 345 17195 other
mozilla-foundation/common_voice_7_0 1,330 163 67,565 cc0-1.0
stanfordnlp/imdb 1,329 208 20,078 other
legacy-datasets/wikipedia 1,219 528 1,657 cc-by-sa-3.0, gfdl
google/xtreme 1,154 82 982 apache-2.0, cc-by-4.0, cc-by-2.0,
cc-by-sa-4.0, other, cc-by-nc-4.0
mozilla-foundation/common_voice_11_0 1,130 163 67,565 cc0-1.0
eriktks/conll2003 880 115 6,171 other
any base models. We observe some overlap with the ten most engaged with models by downloads,
suggesting, not surprisingly, that popular models are also frequently used as base models.
In addition to base models, we investigate the datasets used for model training. We observe that
75,516 (9.9%) models declare at least one dataset. Of these, 64,343 (85.2%) declare a single dataset,
5,066 (6.7%) declare two datasets, and 1,637 (2.2%) declare three datasets. The number of datasets
also exhibits long-tail behavior, with one model (tasksource/deberta-base-long-nli) declaring
287 distinct datasets. However, the vast majority of models declare no dataset, with 0 declared
models as the average, minimum, and first three quartiles, while the maximum is 287 datasets. We
observe that this low percentage of declared datasets is particularly notable since, by their nature,
nearly all ML models on Hugging Face should have been trained on at least one dataset, even if
that dataset is not publicly available.
Table 9 describes the top ten declared datasets. We observe no overlap with the ten most liked
or downloaded datasets. This may be a consequence of the low declaration rate for datasets, a
function of a dataset’s age, or the fact that popular “datasets” uploaded to Hugging Face may not
be intended for model training, as observed above.
License declarations vary among the datasets. Half of the ten most declared datasets are made
available under a license declared as “Other. ” One example from Google appears under six distinct li-
censes, including theapache-2.0license, several Creative Commons licenses, and an “Other” license.
While these are all listed in the dataset’s metadata, the dataset card’s field for licensing information
simply says, “More Information Needed, ” leaving it unclear as to how these licenses jointly apply to
the dataset. This suggests that even very popular components can contain ambiguities that make
the license compliance process more difficult.
6.3 Structure of the supply chain
As explained in Section 4.1, our mined dataset consists of over 760,000 models. Our final model
supply chain graph, which features the reported dependency relationships between models, features
761,826 nodes (models) and 126,995 directed edges. We remove any edges related to trivial cycles
discussed in Section 4.3.3 where a model reports itself as its own base. This leaves us with 126,320
directed edges. The number of models in the graph exceeds the number in the dataset because
some models were declared as dependencies but were not observed on Hugging Face at the time of
mining. These models might have been removed, made private, exist on another platform, or had a
name change that we were unable to trace.
The constructed supply chain graph can provide valuable information to model owners and
researchers. For example, we can determine which models in the Hugging Face ecosystem are
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: September 2025.
===== PAGE 18 =====
18
Trevor Stalnaker, Nathan Wintersgill, Oscar Chaparro, Laura A. Heymann, Massimiliano Di Penta, Daniel M German,
and Denys Poshyvanyk
Table 10. Nodes of DegreeNin Model Graph
Degree* Node Count Percentage
0 635,966 83.5%
1 111,840 14.7%
2 6,643 0.9%
3 2,550 0.3%
4 1,392 0.2%
5 764 0.1%
* Degree refers to the total count of incoming and outgoing edges
the most relied upon, and thus for which models complete, accurate documentation, compliance
checks, and security audits may be more critical.
6.3.1 Analysis of Removed Cycles.As noted above, we removed from the analysis 675 trivial cycles.
Of these, 168 featured nodes that were connected to other models in the supply chain graph. There
were 154 instances (92%) where a model reportedly depended on itself and was also reported as a
base for a another model. There were 14 instances (8%) in which a model reportedly depended on
itself and at least one other model. In most cases, these cycles likely represent typos introduced
by the model owner, but they could potentially also be artifacts indicating iterative fine-tuning or
some other additional training.
6.3.2 Analysis of graph degree and density.There were 635,966 models (83.5%) isolated from the rest
of the graph with no incoming or outgoing edges, representing the vast majority. In other words,
they have a degree of zero. The next largest portion of nodes, a cohort of 111,840 (14.7%), have degree
one. (“Degree” here refers to the total count of incomingandoutgoing edges.) Table 10 shows the
breakdown for statistics for up to degree five. There was one model,distilbert/distilbert-base-
uncased, that had an astounding degree of 5,240. For this model, all of these represented outgoing
edges, meaning that 5,240 models recorded depending ondistilbert/distilbert-base-uncased.
Taking all this together, the graph’s density is very low (2.18𝑥10−7), reinforcing that most models
do not record any model dependency relationships. We rely onnetworkx’sdensityfunction to
calculate and return the graph density, using Equation (1).
𝐷= |𝐸|
|𝑉|(|𝑉|−1) , where|𝑉|is the number of nodes and|𝐸|is the number of edges.(1)
There are 13,985 model nodes that have at least one outgoing edge, meaning they are depended
upon by at least one other model. Almost half of these (7,032) have at least two outgoing edges. 620
model nodes have an outgoing degree of twenty or more, and 150 have an outgoing degree of one
hundred or more. There are 116,576 model nodes that have at least one incoming edge, meaning
they record depending on at least one base model. Only 5,673 of these records are based on two
or more base models. All of this demonstrates, unsurprisingly, that models are more likely to rely
on other models than they are to be relied on themselves. We also note that this shows that the
machine learning ecosystem is upheld by more than just a handful of well-known and readily
recognizable models, such as the 150 models with one hundred or more direct dependents.
6.3.3 Connected components (subgraphs).There are 643,653 connected components (i.e., disjoint
subgraphs) within our supply chain graph. Nearly all of these, 635,966 (98.8%), are trivial subgraphs
including just a single node. An additional 3,550 subgraphs are made up of only two nodes. Table 11
breaks down the most common order frequencies for the subgraphs. From this, it is clear that the
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: September 2025.
===== PAGE 19 =====
An Empirical Analysis of Machine Learning Model and Dataset Documentation, Supply Chain, and Licensing Challenges
on Hugging Face 19
Table 11. Subgraph Order Frequencies
Order Count
1 635,966
2 3,550
3 1,349
4 803
5 519
connected components constructed based on available documentation tended to be small, but there
were 107 subgraphs that contained one hundred or more nodes.
6.3.4 An analysis of the largest subgraph.The largest subgraph featured 28,879 nodes and 35,633
edges, giving it a density of8.54𝑥10−5. The majority of nodes in this graph, 22,099 (76.5%), have a
degree of one. This is followed by 3364 (11.6%) nodes with degree two and 1235 (4.3%) nodes with
degree three. There were multiple hubs within the supply chain that served to connect the various
nodes. For example, there were 81 nodes that had a degree greater than fifty. These represent
popular models that have many models fine-tuned or based on them. See Table 8 for details on the
top ten such models. Ultimately, we see that the sparse nature that is representative of the entire
Hugging Face supply chain graph also applies to its largest connected component.
6.4 Model lineages
6.4.1 Lengths of model supply chains.We define a lineage chain as a path from some root base
model (i.e., one with no model dependencies) to a final sink node model (i.e., one without any model
dependents). We found and examine 53,151 lineage chains for models that declare at least one base
model, including cases where multiple chains lead to the same model. Of these, the average chain
length to reach that model is 6.2 models. The most frequent chain length is three models (12,480
chains); the minimum is 2 models, the first quartile is 3, the median is 4, the third quartile is 9, and
the maximum is 40.
6.4.2 Licenses present in model supply chains.There are typically relatively few parent/child
license differences between models in these chains. We remind the reader than a parent/child
license difference does not necessitate an incompatibility, but instead demonstrates that some
licensing decisions (or lack thereof in the case of neglecting to license a derivative work) were made
along the chain. There was an average of 1.9 distinct licenses in a given chain, including unknown
or undeclared licenses. The minimum and first quartile are both just 1 license, both the median
and third quartile are 2 licenses, and the maximum is 6 licenses. A chain most commonly contains
2 licenses (24,069 chains), and the highest number of licenses observed was 6, occurring in 17
different chains. A relatively small number of parent/child license differences simplifies the task of
managing license compliance. However, these differences within a lineage necessitate examination
of license compatibility, as well as a possible need to find mitigations for items in model chains
when required by the license of a base model.
6.4.3 Model ownership.We also observe that when choosing models to build off of, developers
using Hugging Face often use models from the community rather than using their own previous
work as a base. The owners of nodes at the end of a chain appeared within that node’s chain only
1.4 times on average, showing that base models are frequently sourced from the community and
supporting the idea that a common approach to training a model involves building on previous
work. Alternatively, it could be that model trainers do not provide base model information when
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: September 2025.
===== PAGE 20 =====
20
Trevor Stalnaker, Nathan Wintersgill, Oscar Chaparro, Laura A. Heymann, Massimiliano Di Penta, Daniel M German,
and Denys Poshyvanyk
Table 12. Top 10 model and dataset owners on Hugging Face
Models Datasets
Owner Model Count Owner Dataset Count
mradermacher 4,610 open-llm-leaderboard-old 7,059
thebloke 3,863 cyberharem 3,384
huggingtweets 3,830 autoevaluate 3,232
tkcho 3,810 recag 2,345
jeevesh8 3,723 liuyanchen1015 1,558
prunaai 3,411 adapterocean 810
lonestriker 3,241 tyzhu 807
sail-rvc 3,182 joey234 705
larryaidraw 3,046 lots-of-loras 500
cyberharem 2,978 results-sd-v1-5-sd-v2-1-if-v1-0-karlo 462
building on their own work at least some of the time. Future work involving discussions with
developers could shed light on the reasons behind this phenomenon.
In 82.9% of chains (43,507), the owner of the final model in the chain owned no other model in
that chain. In the maximum case, the chain contained 39 models from the final model’s owner. The
minimum, first quartile, median, and third quartile are all a single occurrence of the final model’s
owner in a given chain: only the final model itself.
Based on our observations, a given owner publishes relatively few models to Hugging Face,
owning, on average, 4 models in our dataset, though the data is skewed heavily toward relatively
few highly-prolific owners. Of 190,136 distinct model owners in our dataset, 61.5% owned just one
public model (117,016), while the most prolific account owned 4,610 models. The first quartile and
median are both just 1 owned model, and the third quartile is 2 models. Notably, the large players
mentioned above, including Meta and OpenAI, are not present in the top 10 most prolific model
owners: those spots instead go to smaller stakeholders in the AI market. The top ten model and
dataset owners on Hugging Face are shown in Table 12. There is only one overlap between the two
lists.
6.5 Summary
Our findings show that Hugging Face components rarely declare datasets, generally have short
chains of related components, and when dependency relationships between components exist,
licensing information usually stays the same from parent to child. This perhaps simplifies the task
of managing dependencies and licensing, but largely by virtue of the fact that relevant supply chain
information appears to be missing in many such cases.
7 RQ 2: LICENSING OF MODELS AND DATASETS ON HUGGING FACE
Only 37.8% of models and 27.6% of datasets declared licensing information in a machine-readable
way (see Section 4.3). In this section, we investigate this licensing information to better understand
how datasets and models are licensed in the ML supply chain. We begin by organizing the licenses
that we observed into six categories, intended to be indicative of the origin or purpose of the licenses
(whether the licenses were designed for open source software, for ML components specifically, or
for other purposes) and are not intended to convey any legal characteristics, particularly given
the uncertainty involved in applying these licenses in the ML context. These categories are not
aimed at resolving compliance issues but instead demonstrate the complex and diverse landscape
of licenses in the ML supply chain. We define the following categories:
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: September 2025.
===== PAGE 21 =====
An Empirical Analysis of Machine Learning Model and Dataset Documentation, Supply Chain, and Licensing Challenges
on Hugging Face 21
Table 13. Top 10 licenses for models.
Models
License Type Count Percent
(of licensed)
apache-2.0 OSS 119,449 41.6%
mit OSS 51,184 17.8%
openrail ML 30,095 10.5%
creativeml-openrail-m ML 20,396 7.1%
other Other 16,447 5.7%
cc-by-nc-4.0 CC 8,318 2.9%
llama2 ML 6,158 2.1%
unknown Unknown 4,419 1.5%
cc-by-4.0 CC 4,269 1.5%
llama3 ML 3,335 1.2%
Table 14. Top 10 licenses for datasets.
Datasets
License Type Count Percent
(of licensed)
mit OSS 13,501 27.9%
apache-2.0 OSS 12,372 25.6%
openrail ML 5,501 11.4%
cc-by-4.0 CC 2,673 5.5%
unknown Unknown 2,194 4.5%
other Other 1,837 3.8%
cc-by-sa-4.0 CC 1,256 2.6%
cc-by-nc-4.0 CC 1,014 2.1%
cc-by-nc-sa-4.0 CC 946 2.0%
cc0-1.0 CC 799 1.7%
•OSS: open source software licenses such asMIT,Apache, andGPL
•CC: Creative Commons licenses
•ML: ML-specific licenses such asopen-railandllama
•Data: licenses that are intended to specifically protect data such asodblandc-uda
•Other: the “Other” license category on Hugging Face
•Unknown: the “Unknown” license category on Hugging Face
7.1 Most common licenses
There were 71 unique declared licenses for models and 70 for datasets. Tables 13 and 14 provide an
overview of the ten most frequently observed licenses.
We classify licenses by the categories defined above. A breakdown of the prevalence of these
classes can be found in Table 15. Both models (62.5%) and datasets (58%) were most often licensed
under approved OSS licenses. This is particularly interesting with respect to datasets, as we would
expect to see primarily CC or Data licenses, as datasets are not “software” in a strict sense of the
word. This may reflect that Hugging Face developers view models and datasets more similarly to
programs than to data or that developers rely on OSS licenses because they are already familiar
with their terms. However, as prior work indicates [32], the relationships between these preexisting
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: September 2025.
===== PAGE 22 =====
22
Trevor Stalnaker, Nathan Wintersgill, Oscar Chaparro, Laura A. Heymann, Massimiliano Di Penta, Daniel M German,
and Denys Poshyvanyk
Table 15. Prevalence of License Classes
Models Datasets
License Class Count Percent License Class Count Percent
OSS 179,421 62.5% OSS 28,047 58.0%
ML 66,540 23.2% CC 9,151 18.9%
CC 19,856 6.9% ML 6,481 13.4%
Other 16,447 5.7% Unknown 2,194 4.5%
Unknown 4,419 1.5% Other 1,837 3.8%
Data 326 0.1% Data 559 1.2%
Combination 134 0.05% Combination 87 0.2%
Total Licensed 287,143 100.0% Total Licensed 48,356 100.0%
licenses and these new types of components in the ML supply chain, as well as the legal and other
implications of licensing such components with such licenses, are currently unknown. Further
research is needed to understand the reasoning behind these licensing choices, as well as to
understand the interactions between many of these licenses and ML components.
Both models and datasets are distributed with (i) OSS licenses specific to software (both restrictive
and permissive), (ii) Creative Commons (CC) licenses, which are not software-specific yet are
being used for software (e.g., Stack Overflow’s adoption of CC licenses), and ML-specific licenses.
For models, our findings are consistent with those of Pepeet al.[ 93], showing that permissive
OSS licenses such asApache-2.0andMITare popular in this space. This is not surprising, as
such licenses are also among the most popular for open-source projects [ 105, 107] and allow
commercial/closed-source exploitation. We note that, in general, the top licenses adopted on
Hugging Face are traditionally understood to be more permissive, even if their exact application in
this novel context is not fully understood.
We also note the adoption (for models, but especially for datasets) of different variants of the CC
license, including a permissive license (CC-BY), restrictive licenses (CC-BY-SAandCC-BY-NC-SA),
and licenses limiting non-commercial use only (CC-BY-NC).
Besides OSS licenses, we see a large proportion of different kinds of ML-specific licenses. These
include both licenses originating from open-source initiatives (e.g.,openrailandcreativeml-
openrail-m), and licenses originating from companies (e.g., Meta’sllama2andllama3licenses).
Such licenses tend to have terms that differ from typical redistribution terms established by software
licenses such as, for example, terms that require responsible model usage or prohibit adoption
for harmful or unethical uses or uses that do not take models’ limitations into account. Likewise,
thellama2andllama3licenses impose limitations related to commercial use, use in products or
services having more than 700 million monthly active users, and use to train other models, unless
such models are redistributed, under the same licenses, as derivative works ofllamamodels.
Lastly, we note the increased prevalence of Hugging Face’s “Other” license, which was ranked
7th in a study conducted by Pepeet al.[ 93], but has since moved to the 5th spot since. In fact, 3.8%
of datasets and 5.7% of models are licensed with some “Other” license.
7.2 Exploration of the “Other” License
In our entire dataset, 5.7% of licensed models were labeled as being under some “Other” license. This
makes the “Other” category the fifth most common licensing choice for models on Hugging Face,
representing over sixteen thousand models. Non-standard, custom/vanity licenses can complicate
compliance processes for organizations and individuals, given that the documents no longer
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: September 2025.
===== PAGE 23 =====
An Empirical Analysis of Machine Learning Model and Dataset Documentation, Supply Chain, and Licensing Challenges
on Hugging Face 23
Table 16. “Other” license information for Top 25 “Other”-licensed models
Model Name Resolved License Find Location
facebook/opt-125m OPT-175B LICENSE AGREEMENT LICENSE.md
stabilityai/sdxl-turbo sai-nc-community LICENSE.md
coqui/XTTS-v2 coqui-public-model-license LICENSE.txt
facebook/mask2former-swin-base-coco-panoptic None Available* None Available
briaai/RMBG-1.4 BRIA 2.0 on HuggingFace Model License Agreement External Link
(connected to tag)
facebook/mask2former-swin-large-cityscapes-semantic None Available* None Available
apple/DFN5B-CLIP-ViT-H-14-378 apple-sample-code-license LICENSE
facebook/opt-1.3b OPT-175B LICENSE AGREEMENT LICENSE.md
facebook/mask2former-swin-large-ade-semantic None Available* None Available
Lykon/DreamShaper CreativeML Open RAIL-M
Addendum*
External Link
(in model card)
Salesforce/instructblip-vicuna-7b None Available* None Available
SanctumAI/Meta-Llama-3-8B-Instruct-GGUF llama3 LICENSE
cagliostrolab/animagine-xl-3.1 faipl-1.0-sd External Link
(connected to tag)
stabilityai/stable-video-diffusion-img2vid-xt stable-video-diffusion-community LICENSE.md
apple/mobilevit-small apple-sample-code-license In model card
jartine/gemma-2-27b-it-llamafile Gemma License In model card*
facebook/opt-350m OPT-175B LICENSE AGREEMENT LICENSE.md
Qwen/Qwen2-72B-Instruct-AWQ tongyi-qianwen LICENSE
Mozilla/Meta-Llama-3-70B-Instruct-llamafile Llama3 In tags*
digiplay/AbsoluteReality_v1.8.1 Absolute Reality License* External Link
(in model card)
qwp4w3hyb/Qwen2-72B-Instruct-iMat-GGUF tongyi-qianwen In tags*
google/mobilenet_v1_0.75_192 None Available None Available
Qwen/Qwen2-72B-Instruct tongyi-qianwen LICENSE
mradermacher/QuartetAnemoi-70B-t0.0001-i1-GGUF None Available None Available
SanctumAI/Codestral-22B-v0.1-GGUF mnpl In tags*
* Information was ultimately inconsistent, unavailable, or changed since initial mining.
represent a known quantity [114]. To assess the nature and potential impact of these licenses, we
investigate these “Other” licenses in further detail.
7.2.1 Manual analysis of models under the “Other” license.We examine the licenses of the top 25
“Other”-licended models, sorted by downloads, as well as those of 25 additional, randomly sampled
“Other”-licensed models from the total population. Our assumption is that the popularity of models
in the high-downloads group indicates a tendency toward high-quality documentation practices,
allowing us to investigate a detailed and meaningful sample of projects licensed in this way while
maintaining a reasonable sample size for manual analysis. We also select a random sample in an
attempt to determine if the same licensing trends exist across the ecosystem, even for less popular
models. One author manually and systematically reviewed the model pages of these 50 models to
identify more specific licensing information. Cumulatively, these 50 models represent 13,945,199
downloads (0.8% of all model downloads). The results can be seen in Tables 16 and 17. (One of the
models randomly sampled was no longer available on Hugging Face for analysis.)
7.2.2 Top 25 “Other” licensed models.For the top 25 models, additional licensing information was
most often found in a LICENSE file that was associated with the repository, but four (16%) linked to
an external page that included more licensing information. There were four cases (16%), including
three Facebook models, where a specific license could not be determined, but one could be inferred
from a related GitHub repository, which often was not directly linked to the model card. We also
observed a case,Lykon/DreamShaper, where the license that was specified in the model card did
not match the external reference also provided.
Determining the licenses for some models required looking beyond the information provided on
Hugging Face itself. For example, the README for the modeldigiplay/AbsoluteReality_v1.8.1
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: September 2025.
===== PAGE 24 =====
24
Trevor Stalnaker, Nathan Wintersgill, Oscar Chaparro, Laura A. Heymann, Massimiliano Di Penta, Daniel M German,
and Denys Poshyvanyk
Table 17. “Other” license information for random sample of “Other”-licensed models
Model Name License Location
Shalie/EliraPendoraPonyXL faipl-1.0-sd External Link (connected to tag)
sukhoi37/sp_weshi None Available* None Available
Bobross69/Usagiyam None Available* None Available
baratk/barat Empty file LICENSE file
styalai/competition-math-phinetune-v1 None Available* None Available
divyanshu074/Text_Beat None Available* None Available
LoneStriker/WhiteRabbitNeo-33B-v1-3.0bpw-h6-exl2 deepseek External Link (connected to tag)
jiuhai/llama3-ift REMOVED* REMOVED*
KnutJaegersberg/Deacon-34B-qlora yi-license LICENSE file
second-state/Qwen1.5-1.8B-Chat-GGUF tongyi-qianwen-research LICENSE file
psychicfire/sample None Available* None Available
Workaholic/fake-pvc-style None Available* None Available
azi111/dolphin-2_2-yi-34b-465bpw-h8-exl2-cnen Empty file LICENSE file
dranger003/deepseek-coder-33b-instruct-iMat.GGUF deepseek External Link (connected to tag)
optimai/porne-0 None Available* None Available
cortecs/Meta-Llama-3-70B-Instruct-GPTQ-8b None Available* None Available
TheBloke/MergeMonster-13B-20231124-GPTQ Other / llama2 Model card
yzhuang/Meta-Llama-3-8B-Instruct_fictional_Chinese_v3 None Available* None Available
fasterinnerlooper/stable-code-3b None Available* None Available
DevQuasar/Qwen2-72B-Instruct-GGUF tongyi-qianwen External Link (connected to tag)
titan087/Llama3-70B-ShiningValiant2-exl2-4b llama3 External Link (connected to tag)
nulltella/phi-1_5-alcapa-51k-instruct None Available* None Available
Holarissun/mar13_gemma2b_aisft_gsm8k_rand_alpha0.9995-subset7000 None Available* None Available
raincandy-u/Quark-464M-v0.1.alpha tongyi-qianwen-research External Link (connected to tag)
TheBloke/Tess-34B-v1.4-GGUF yi-34b External Link (connected to tag)
* Information was ultimately inconsistent, unavailable, or changed since initial mining.
included a link to a model page on an external site (Civitai.com). On this page, the license is reported
asCreativeML Open RAIL-M Addendum. Originally, clicking the link associated with the license
would take the user to a page for theAbsolute Reality License(a confusing license mismatch),
but in the time since, the link has been corrected to point to the full text of theCreativeML Open
RAIL-M Addendum.
We can also see there were three instances where a model reported an “Other” license, but the
actual license specified was in Hugging Face’s recognized license list (eitherllama3orgemma).
This could be the result of the model owner uploading their model before the license was officially
recognized or a general unfamiliarity on the uploader’s part with the available license options. In
either case, this particular error further underscores the manual and error-prone documentation
processes on Hugging Face.
Somewhat surprisingly, even after systematic manual documentation searches (including web
searches for associated GitHub repositories), there were two models in the top 25 “Other” licensed
models (8%) where the specific license could not be identified. From a practical standpoint, these
models might as well not be licensed at all, since users cannot comply with unavailable terms and
conditions.
Interestingly, two of the models that had no licensing information included in their documen-
tation,Salesforce/instructblip-vicuna-7bandgoogle/mobilenet_v1_0.75_192, actually had
model cards produced by the Hugging Face team.
7.2.3 Random sample of 25 Other-licensed models.Next, we examined an additional random sample
of 25 models that were reportedly under an “Other”’ license. This would allow us to determine if
the licensing practices followed by the top 25 are representative of the ecosystem. As one might
expect, we found that identifying the licenses for many of these models was difficult. Ten models
(40%) had model cards that were void of all text. One additional model had some information in
its model card but none that pertained to licensing. Two more models had LICENSE files in their
repositories, but the files were empty. Another model,Meta-Llama-3-70B-Instruct-GPTQ-8b,
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: September 2025.
===== PAGE 25 =====
An Empirical Analysis of Machine Learning Model and Dataset Documentation, Supply Chain, and Licensing Challenges
on Hugging Face 25
Table 18. “Other” licenses reported inCardDataattribute in Top 10,000 “Other”-licensed models
License Name Count Percentage
faipl-1.0-sd 2346 23%
flux-1-dev-non-commercial-license 1172 12%
llama3 269 3%
deepseek 206 2%
tongyi-qianwen 201 2%
provided no further licensing information, but given its name, one might infer it was under the
Llama3license.
Some of the models, however, did include more specific licensing information. Six (24%) had
links to external references included in their metadata. One model, while labeled as licensed under
“Other”, was actually under theLlama3license. Two models had LICENSE files that provided
additional license information.
In the text of the model card forTheBloke/MergeMonster-13B-20231124-GPTQ, we observed
the model owner grappling with certain ambiguities and uncertainties surrounding the “Other”
license: “The creator of the source model has listed its license as other, and this quantization has
therefore used that same license. As this model is based on Llama 2, it is also subject to the Meta
Llama 2 license terms, and the license files for that are additionally included. It should therefore
be considered as being claimed to be licensed under both licenses. I contacted Hugging Face for
clarification on dual licensing but they do not yet have an official position. Should this change,
or should Meta provide any feedback on this situation, I will update this section accordingly.
In the meantime, any questions regarding licensing, and in particular how these two licenses
might interact, should be directed to the original model repository. ” Here, we see that properly
maintaining license compliance can be a difficult and confusing task, particularly when all relevant
information is not made readily available. It is also important to note that since the original model
being quantized was itself a derivative of aLlama2model, this model uploader has restored the
Llama2license to remain compliant.
7.2.4 Automated analysis of models under the Other license.Having determined from the manual
review of 50 models reportedly under the “Other” license how and where to find more specific
licensing information, we next moved to an automated approach that could provide insights about
the most common “Other” licenses in the ecosystem. We note that since this analysis required
access to more data than was originally pulled for the rest of the dataset described in this paper,
we conducted a separate smaller mining on February 1, 2025. Specifically, we pulled the top ten
thousand models (sorted by downloads) that reported they were under the “Other” license. We
acknowledge that the results of this subsequent mining may not perfectly align with the dataset
presented in the rest of this work, but nonetheless, we believe it is worthwhile to explore the
phenomenon of the “Other” license in more depth.
Table 18 shows the top 5 specific licenses that were reported in theCardDataattribute. Over a
third of models (36%) did not provide additional licensing information in theirCardData. Three
percent of models are actually under thellama3license, which is in the recognized license list
on Hugging Face [35]. As mentioned before, this suggests that either these models were uploaded
beforellama3was added to the official list and have not been updated or that the model owners
are unfamiliar with the licenses available in the official list. In either case, feasible tooling solutions
can be readily imagined to resolve these problems.
There is a further lack of standardization in the licenses reported as “Other”. For example,
206 models reportdeepseekand an additional 85 report thedeepseek-license, though these are
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: September 2025.
===== PAGE 26 =====
26
Trevor Stalnaker, Nathan Wintersgill, Oscar Chaparro, Laura A. Heymann, Massimiliano Di Penta, Daniel M German,
and Denys Poshyvanyk
Table 19. Parent/child license difference categories and their frequencies
Difference Type Description Example Count Percentage
No Overlap Both the parent and child are licensed, but
there is no overlap in their licensingcc-by-nc-4.0→apache-2.0 36,441 54.8%
Licensing DroppedThe parent is under one or more licenses,
but the child has no specified licenseapache-2.0→UNDECLARED 19,435 29.2%
Licensing AddedThe child is under one or more licenses, but
the parent has no specified licenseUNDECLARED→apache-2.0 10,548 15.9%
License(s) Added
In a multi-licensing scenario, the child retains
all of its parent’s licenses and adds one or more
additional licenses.
apache-2.0→apache-2.0|mit 28 0.04%
License(s) Removed
In a multi-licensing scenario, the child is no
longer under one or more licenses that apply
to its parent, but is still licensed and adds no
additional licenses.
apache-2.0|bsd-3-clause→bsd-3-clause 8 0.01%
Total Changes --66,460 100.0%
Table 20. Most common parent/child license differences
Parent License Child License Count Percentage
cc-by-nc-4.0 apache-2.0 11,001 30.19%
apache-2.0 cc-by-nc-4.0 7,427 20.38%
cc-by-4.0 cc-by-nc-4.0 2,626 7.21%
other llama3 1,720 4.72%
cc-by-nc-4.0 cc-by-4.0 1,444 3.96%
other apache-2.0 1348 3.70%
apache-2.0 mit 1,241 3.41%
cc-by-nc-nd-4.0 cc-by-nc-4.0 1,180 3.24%
llama3 other 1,083 2.97%
apache-2.0 cc-by-4.0 782 2.15%
presumably the same license. As previously mentioned, 269 models erroneously reportllama3
as their “Other” license, but an additional 27 report being under thellama-3license. We see 110
models under thegemma-terms-of-use, even though the proper identifier for this model is just
gemma[ 35]. All of this further underscores the problems inherent in providing developers with a
free-text field instead of assisted tool support that suggests known licenses.
7.3 Parent/child license differences
Our dataset contains 274,104 distinct parent/child relationships. We observed 66,460 instances (24%)
where the licensing of a child model (i.e., derivative model) was different from that of its parent (i.e.,
base model). Table 19 provides an overview of the types of differences observed. In nearly a third of
cases, child models specified no licensing information despite information being available for their
parent(s), leading to a potential compliance issue. We also observe that once license information has
been dropped, it is unlikely to be restored by later links in the chain, with license restoration behavior
observed in only 15.9% of instances. A complete shift in licensing between parent and child was seen
in 54.8% of cases (i.e., no licenses were shared between the two). Of these shifts, 18.5% involved the
“Unknown” or “Other” license category. Table 20 shows the top ten such shifts, and Figure 3 provides
more information on how licensing decisions shifted across categories between parents and their
children (e.g., a difference fromcc-by-4.0toMIT), as well as how licensing decisions shifted within
categories (e.g., a difference fromMITtoApache-2.0)While ML-specific licenses seem a good fit for
models, model owners may be opting for licenses they are more familiar and comfortable with (OSS
for software developers and CC for data scientists). We observe that most shifts occur between the
OSS and CC categories (68.3%), perhaps suggesting some tension between the licensing preferences
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: September 2025.
===== PAGE 27 =====
An Empirical Analysis of Machine Learning Model and Dataset Documentation, Supply Chain, and Licensing Challenges
on Hugging Face 27
OSS
MLCC
11,478
(38.6%) 8,808
(29.6%)
1,766 (5.9%)
456
(1.5%)591
(2%)
714
(2.4%)
377
(1.3%)5,415 (18.2%) 99 (0.3%)
Data
4 (0.01%)
Fig. 3. Parent/child license differences across categories (Total differences: 29,708)
Table 21. Model license and dataset license pairs
Model License Dataset License Count Percentage
apache-2.0 other 8196 18.9%
apache-2.0 cc0-1.0 4621 10.6%
mit mit 4479 10.3%
apache-2.0 apache-2.0 3916 9.0%
apache-2.0 unknown 2993 6.9%
apache-2.0 mit 2734 6.3%
mit other 2290 5.3%
apache-2.0 cc-by-4.0 2076 4.8%
apache-2.0 cc-by-sa-4.0 1934 4.5%
mit apache-2.0 1739 4.0%
of those with data science and software development backgrounds. Additionally, depending on
the specifics of the situation and the licenses involved, these shifts can also potentially introduce
license incompatibilities, such as dropping non-commercial requirements or failing to apply the
requirements of a copyleft license.
7.4 Dataset license and model license combinations
The licenses of datasets that are used during training can have an impact on the licensing decisions
for the final ML model. Here we consider the pairings of dataset licenses and the resultant model
licenses. There are 623 distinct model/dataset license combinations within our dataset across 43,455
such pairings; however, since we (and Hugging Face) aggregated all “Other” licenses under one
label, these numbers likely overestimate the consistency in the space. (The top ten most frequent
can be found in Table 21.) The license of the model exactly matches the license of at least one
dataset it was trained on in only 41 of the 623 combinations. The most common combination is a
model licensed under theapache-2.0license and a dataset under a custom or “Other” license, with
11,731 (27%) pairs involving a dataset under a custom or “Other” license. This can make using these
datasets and models problematic since retrieving and evaluating the licensing terms can be difficult
and time-consuming.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: September 2025.
===== PAGE 28 =====
28
Trevor Stalnaker, Nathan Wintersgill, Oscar Chaparro, Laura A. Heymann, Massimiliano Di Penta, Daniel M German,
and Denys Poshyvanyk
7.5 Additional licensing findings
7.5.1 Multi-licensing.A few models (188) and datasets (104) were released under more than one
license. Multi-licensing is an existing phenomenon in the world of open-source software but is
made more complex in the ML model context by the presence of novel license combinations that
are not yet well understood. Examples include the 48 models we observed multi-licensed under
apache-2.0andcc-by-nc-4.0as well as models under both OSS and ML licenses, such asMITand
OpenRAIL. We observe examples of such multilicensing in the most declared datasets in Table 9. We
also observed datasets that were released under as many as six distinct licenses. The Hugging Face
metadata provides no way of determining the relationship among these licenses, which may be an
AND or an OR, or even indicate, as observed in Sections 8.4.2 and 9.3, that portions of the dataset
are under different licenses. Regardless, this distinction is critical to determining compliance. For
example, if a user who uploaded allama2derivative model chose to make it available with an
OR relationship between theapache-2.0andllama2licenses, this would contradict the exclusive
llama2licensing of its base model, resulting in a violation that could propagate to models further
down the chain. While we observed only a few instances of multi-licensing, such activity motivates
the need to understand the interplay between the various license classes and for Hugging Face to
supply a standardized way to specify the intended relationship between licenses.
As a case study, we consider the most common example of multi-licensing found across mod-
els: a combination of theapache-2.0andcc-by-nc-4.0licenses. Depending on the relationship
between these two licenses and the reasoning for including them, the combination could repre-
sent potential compliance challenges. To explore this, we conduct a manual analysis ofmrader-
macher/ NSFW_DPO_Noromaid-7b-Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.1-GGUF, the model under this
licensing scheme with the most downloads. This model is a quantization ofMaziyarPanahi/
NSFW_DPO_Noromaid-7b-Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.1, which is also dual licensed in the same
way. The model card forMaziyarPanahi/NSFW_DPO_Noromaid-7b-Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.1
describes it as a merge of two additional models. The first,mistralai/Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.1,
is under theapache-2.0license, and the second,athirdpath/NSFW_DPO_Noromaid-7b, is under
thecc-by-nc-4.0license. Following the supply chain back further, we observe that the dataset that
athirdpath/ NSFW_DPO_Noromaid-7bwas trained on was also licensed undercc-by-nc-4.0.
mistralai/Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.1is a finetune ofmistralai/Mistral-7B-v0.1, but there is
no record of the data used for training. From all of this we see that the licensing relationship in this
multi-licensing example is likely intended to be an AND (i.e., that the model is released under the
terms of both theapache-2.0andcc-by-nc-4.0licenses). However, if other model trainers were to
interpret the relationship as an OR (i.e., the model is licensed such that creators of derivative works
can freely choose which licensing terms, either theapache-2.0orcc-by-nc-4.0license, to follow),
it is possible that the non-commercial limitation imposed by thecc-by-nc-4.0license could be
dropped and non-compliance could be introduced. We also note that here, instead of finding a single
suitable license forMaziyarPanahi/NSFW_DPO_Noromaid-7b-Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.1, the
model owner opted to just include the licenses of both dependencies. While not observed in this
case, it is possible that this strategy could fail in certain instances where dependency licenses
conflict.
7.5.2 Naming requirements.Some licenses, likeLlama3, impose a generational limitation [ 73] that
specifies naming requirements for derivative works. According to the license, models that are built
on a model under this license must have names prefixed with “llama3” [82]. In our dataset, there
are 3,335 models licensed underllama3. However, of these, only 473 (14.2%) models correctly have
names beginning with “llama3” as required by the license. Only 768 (23%) models even contain
the term “llama3” in their name. Indeed, just 2,421 (72.6%) models contain the term “llama” at all,
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: September 2025.
===== PAGE 29 =====
An Empirical Analysis of Machine Learning Model and Dataset Documentation, Supply Chain, and Licensing Challenges
on Hugging Face 29
and 384 (11.5%) only contain the string “l3. ” The problem is likely even worse in practice, as these
statistics only include models that documented that they were under thellama3license.
7.5.3 Attribution.As was observed during the manual model card analysis described in Section 4.3,
attribution appears to be important to model owners regardless of licensing status. Rather than
requesting or requiring attribution through a license, models without a license often asked for some
form of attribution (29/84), typically in the form of citations. In fact, 83,628 models (11.1%) mined
using the Hugging Face API included a link to a paper onarxiv[ 10] in their tags, thereby providing
a means of citing the work behind the model. In our manual analysis of model cards, we observed
that the model owner was typically also affiliated with (e.g., an author on) the linked research paper.
This desire for recognition is reflected by the top licenses in the space, namelyMITandApache-2.0,
each of which specifies attribution requirements. (A similar historical example is the evolution of
Creative Commons licenses in the early 2000s, where the overwhelming preference for attribution
led to its becoming a default term [49].) Given the research community’s adoption of Hugging Face,
it may be worthwhile to add dedicated metadata fields to facilitate the standardization of citation
information.
7.6 Real World Potential Incompatibilities
Here, we go beyond the parent/child license differences explored in Section 7.3 and examine some
observed potential incompatibilities. We note that the list of compatibility issues is not exhaustive,
since there are many unresolved legal questions concerning the application of certain terms. Here
we report the two most frequently observed issues in our dataset. While other issues were present,
each only represented a few dozen examples in the entire ecosystem, so we exclude them from
this section. We also exclude from this section any mappings that involve “Other”, “Unknown”, or
undeclared licenses.
7.6.1 Dropping of non-commercial requirements.30.19% of parent/child license differences involved
a parent undercc-by-nc-4.0and a child licensed underapache-2.0. An additional 3.96% involved a
difference between the parent licensecc-by-nc-4.0and the child licensecc-by-4.0. In both cases,
the “nc” in the parent license indicates that the work can not be used for commercial purposes. The
apache-2.0license provides no such limitation, thus introducing a potential conflict. A change in
requirements of such a nature could potentially lead to a license violation. Consider a situation
in which a developer releases a component undercc-by-nc-4.0, but later, a different developer
fine-tunes or packages it under themitlicense. A user might seek to use thismit-licensed version
of this component in a commercial product, thinking themitlicense applies, though in the process
they violate the non-commercial requirement of thecc-by-nc-4.0license that the component was
originally made available under. In this sense, we may observe something akin to unintentional (or
perhaps intentional) license laundering [77].
7.6.2 Violation of no derivatives term.Of the total parent/child license differences, 3.24% featured
the parent licensecc-by-nc-nd-4.0and the child licensecc-by-nc-4.0. The only difference between
the two being the dropped “nd” condition, which indicates that no derivatives based on the licensed
work are permitted. This means that if we consider a fine-tuned model to be a derivative of its base
model, then all 1,180 of these instances represent an example of noncompliance.
7.7 Summary
Overall, licensing on Hugging Face presents a number of unique challenges. While traditional
open source software licenses remain popular among ML components, the introduction of ML-
and data-specific licenses raise novel questions regarding the compatibility of different licenses,
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: September 2025.
===== PAGE 30 =====
30
Trevor Stalnaker, Nathan Wintersgill, Oscar Chaparro, Laura A. Heymann, Massimiliano Di Penta, Daniel M German,
and Denys Poshyvanyk
and, as such, different components. The “Unknown” and “Other” licenses complicate the matter of
compliance further by obscuring licensing information. To illustrate the specific difficulties that
may arise, we gathered classes of potential licensing issues currently present in models on Hugging
Face.
8 CASE STUDY: TOP MODELS
To better understand and illustrate the supply chain structure and challenges described in this
section, we present a detailed analysis of the top 100 most downloaded models and the top 100
most liked models from our dataset. As described in Section 7.2.1, we suspect that model downloads
can be used as a proxy for documentation quality.
8.1 Sample construction
Among the 100 top downloaded and 100 top liked models, there were 187 unique models. The
13 overlapping models were mostly uploaded by well-known technology companies, including
OpenAI, Meta, StabilityAI, Google, and Microsoft. The only exception was theall-MiniLM-L6-v2
model uploaded by sentence-transformers. These 187 models collectively yielded 1,465,884,673
downloads, or 79.7% of all 1,838,905,161 downloads from the entire dataset of 760,460 models.
Forty-five (24%) aretext-generationmodels, 28 (15%) aretext-to-imagemodels, and 17 (9%)
aretext-classificationmodels. Other common model types includedfill-mask(7%),speech
recognition(6%), andsentence-similarity(5%). We also note that 21 (11%) models did not
specify the pipeline (i.e., a high-level abstraction that simplifies using models for common tasks,
roughly corresponding to the model’s intended task [39]), revealing documentation shortcomings
even for some popular models.
By far, the most common libraries (i.e., open-source tools available through Hugging Face that
support ML training [37]) used weretransformers(121) andsentence-transformers(11). The
diffuserslibrary was the next most common with 28 instances. Twelve models (6.4%) did not
specify in their documentation any libraries.
Ninety-three unique model owners are represented in the top 187 models, including organizations
like StabilityAI, Google, Meta, Microsoft, and OpenAI. In fact, 91 of the 187 top models (48.6%) are
owned by just 15 model uploaders (without combining owners such as meta-llama, facebook, and
facebookai into one entity), suggesting that a small handful of players dominate the landscape.
Sixty-three model uploaders (67.7%) have only one model in the top 187 models, suggesting long-tail
behavior similar to that observed with respect to the dataset as a whole in Section 6.4.3.
Of the 187 models, 148 models (79%) are relied on by at least one other model available on
Hugging Face (i.e., they are base models). When considering the supply chain graph discussed in
Section 6, we see that the 148 base models collectively have 43,976 outgoing edges, with a mean
out-degree of 235 and a standard deviation of 665. Twenty-one models have an out-degree of one,
and twelve have an out-degree of two. In total, 43,874 distinct models depend on this set of 148
models, further demonstrating their relevance to the ecosystem.
8.2 Documented base models
Four models (2.1%) in the top 187 declare a base model of their own (i.e., they depend on another
model) .Given that many of the models in our set are foundation models, we would not expect
them to be built on other publicly available models. Only three distinct base models were declared
in the set, two of which were contained in the top 187 models themselves (mistralai/Mistral-
7B-v0.1andxlm-roberta-base). Despite the dearth of base model declarations, 8 models showed
evidence of quantization (i.e., completed the “quantization_config” or “quantized_by” fields in its
metadata or included a file containing the substring “quant” in the repository) and were confirmed
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: September 2025.
===== PAGE 31 =====
An Empirical Analysis of Machine Learning Model and Dataset Documentation, Supply Chain, and Licensing Challenges
on Hugging Face 31
Table 22. Licensing information location in Top 187 models
Location Count Percentage of licensed (n=165)
Tags andCardData132 80%
Tags only 27 16%
LICENSE file only 4 2%
Model card text only 2 1%
No licensing information 22 -
to be quantizations through manual analysis. However, none of these quantized models declared a
base model in the appropriate metadata field (e.g.,,CardData/basemodel), yet by virtue of being
quantizations, these models must depend on a base model. This example illustrates the ongoing
need for more thorough documentation and declaration of base models on Hugging Face.
In general, the supply chain of models in the top 187 is shallow. Few models declared a base model,
and those that did relied on a single foundation model with no further dependencies. There were no
instances in which a popular model relied on a less popular one. There were two parent/child license
differences, a switch fromopenrail++tocreativeml-openrail-mand a switch fromapache-2.0
tomit, but neither of these are likely to result in compliance challenges, given the permissive
natures of the licenses involved.
8.3 Model licensing analysis
Next, we explore the presence of licensing information for models within our 187-model sample.
Of that sample, only 156 provided any sort of licensing information, and of those, 80 percent had
licensing information in both their tags and in theirCardDatafield, 16% had licensing information
only in their tags, and no models had licensing information exclusively in theirCardData. This
further reinforces that when considering completeness, the tags are the best source to mine.
However, while the tags seem to be the most complete source of licensing information with respect
to determining what license is declared, theCardDatafield, when completed properly, includes
more specific information, such as external links to license files. Twenty-six models (16%) had a
LICENSE file included in their repository. Of these, twenty-two models (84.6%) also had licensing
information available in both their tags andCardDatafields, and four models reported licensing
information exclusively through the LICENSE file.
Conversely, there were twenty-four models (13%) that did not include any licensing information in
their tags,CardDatafield, or a LICENSE file. We were able to determine the license for only two of
these models (1%) through manual analysis. Six models (25%) included text in their documentation
that provided terms, conditions, or guidance on derivative uses but which was not explicitly
presented as licensing information. (One of these six models stated that the model was open-source,
but provided no specifics.) Eight of the twenty-four models (33%) provided a BibTeX citation,
suggesting that the model owners either want credit for their model or that they want to ensure
that the original trainers receive credit.
Lastly, we note that in three cases licensing information was found only in a seemingly related
GitHub repository, but it was often unclear whether the license applied to the model weights, for
the code that runs/loads them, or both.
Ultimately, most model licenses in our sample are specified in the tags,CardData, or in a
LICENSE file. Table 22 summarizes where licensing information was found for the models in
this dataset. We note that examining the tags alone captures 96 percent of license declaration
information, where such information exists.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: September 2025.
===== PAGE 32 =====
32
Trevor Stalnaker, Nathan Wintersgill, Oscar Chaparro, Laura A. Heymann, Massimiliano Di Penta, Daniel M German,
and Denys Poshyvanyk
Of our 187-model sample, 165 models (88%) declared some identifiable license. An additional six
models (3%) included information on derivative uses, although this information was not presented
as a formal license. Together, 91% of models in the sample include some type of usage-related
information, leaving 9% of models in the sample without any licensing information. Given that
the sample contains the most downloaded and liked models, this lack of information creates a
significant problem for users, who risk violating copyright law as a result.
Discrepancies between information sources were rare, but did occur. There were no license
discrepancies encountered between the tags and theCardDatafields. However, when comparing
the license information available in the tags with included LICENSE files, six potential discrepancies
were observed. One model reported in its tags to be under thecreative-openrail-m, but provided
a completely custom LICENSE file. There were four instances where models declared being licensed
underopenrail++in their tags, but their LICENSE files were forCreativeML Open RAIL++-M,
which is a subset ofOpen Rail++. Lastly, the modelstabilityai/stable-video-diffusion-img2vid-
xtwas reportedly released under something called the stable-video-diffusion-community, but
in reality, the LICENSE file was a verbatim copy of the STABILITY AI COMMUNITY LICENSE
AGREEMENT (referred to assai-nc-communityelsewhere).
Overall, we observed that the most popular models are likely to be permissively licensed. Specif-
ically 66 of the licensed models (40%) were under theapache-2.0license, with an additional 35
models (21%) made available under theMITlicense. The next largest group, with 21 models (13%),
were labeled with an “Other” license, explored in greater detail in Section 7.2. Thirteen models
(8%) were under thecreativeml-openrail-mlicense, and six (4%) were underopenrail++. Other
licenses with at least two instances includedllama2(5),cc-by-nc-4.0(5),llama3(3),openrail(2),
gemma(2),bsd-3-clause(2), andcc-by-4.0(2). None of the most common models were declared to
be under more than one license.
Only one model in the top models was licensed as “Unknown”. This appears to be an error,
however, since there is a form at the top of the model card requesting the user to “Acknowledge
license to access the repository, ” clarifying that the model is under theFalcon-180B TIIlicense. As
such, the “Other” license option would likely have been more apt here.
Inversely, theOpenAssistant/oasst-sft-6-llama-30b-xormodel is reportedly under an “Other”
license, but no additional licensing information is provided, potentially making the “Unknown”
option more apt. Some legal guidance is provided however: “Due to the license attached to LLaMA
models by Meta AI it is not possible to directly distribute LLaMA-based models. Instead we provide
XOR weights for the OA models. ”
The other twenty models under an “Other” license represent issuance under custom and vanity
licenses. Four appear to be modifications of more popular licenses such asCreativeML Open RAIL-
M. The others are unique licenses presumably written by the model owner or their organization.
This suggests that model trainers are unaware of existing licenses, do not want to invest time
researching the terms of existing licenses, or believe that existing licenses do not cover all terms,
conditions, and use cases envisioned by the model trainers. Future work on the software engineering
front will need to consider tooling solutions to help model trainers choose licenses that fit their
specific needs. If it is the case that current licenses are not up to the task, it may be necessary for
legal professionals and researchers to participate in drafting more robust and applicable licenses.
8.4 Documented datasets used
8.4.1 Overview.Only 56 (30%) of models in the sample record at least one training dataset in
their metadata. While large technology companies may conceal training sources to mitigate the
potential of legal liability [70], this is still a rate three times higher than the 10% observed across the
ecosystem at large (Section 6.2). All 56 models recorded dataset information in both the tags and in
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: September 2025.
===== PAGE 33 =====
An Empirical Analysis of Machine Learning Model and Dataset Documentation, Supply Chain, and Licensing Challenges
on Hugging Face 33
theCardDataattribute. A total of 107 datasets were declared across the sample of 187 models,
though we could only verify the presence of 96 of these on Hugging Face. (The remaining eleven
resulted in a 404 error when searching on Hugging Face.) Thirty-three models reported relying on
only a single dataset, but the average was 3.4 with a standard deviation of 5. Three models recorded
relying on as many as 21 datasets.
Even this small set highlights several challenges in uniquely identifying datasets, such as three
datasets, all belonging to the same account, that had their unique identifiers changed when the
dataset owner updated their profile name fromehartfordtocognitivecomputations. Two additional
datasets fromembedding-dataalso had their names changed. Without Hugging Face maintaining a
mapping between the old and new human-readable IDs, it would be extremely difficult to correctly
determine these dependencies. Other ambiguities arise from the unstandardized nature of some
declarations. For example, it is unclear whether the reference to “wikihow” by some of the top
models refers to thewangwilliamyang/wikihowdataset available on Hugging Face, some other
dataset that compiles/aggregates information from wikiHow, or that the model was trained by
scraping the wikiHow website. We explore the problems with identifying datasets further in
Section 5.5.
8.4.2 Dataset licenses.
Unlicensed datasets: Of the 96 observed and mappable datasets used by the top models, twelve
(12%) did not explicitly declare any licensing information in their tags. However, six of these
datasets did declare at least some licensing information in other ways. For example,flax-sentence-
embeddings/stackexchange_xmlpoints users to anarxiv.orglink that includes more specific
licensing information for the dataset, including steps for attribution. Two datasets (kresnik/
zeroth_koreanandtimdettmers/openassistant-guanaco) included licensing details in the
text of their READMEs. Another dataset,openchat/openchat_sharegpt4_dataset, provided
a link to a GitHub repository that did include licensing information. However, the license in the
repository is only explicitly stated to cover the codebase, not the dataset, though this may be
implied. Lastly,cerebras/SlimPajama-627Bandtogethercomputer/RedPajama-Data-1Twere
aggregated datasets that pulled from a variety of other datasets. Their READMEs include links
to the included datasets, leaving the user to determine the appropriate license based on which
portions of the dataset are used. These examples highlight how despite the ability to automatically
detect licenses in many cases, a human investigator may still need to perform manual analysis in
others. Future work may investigate the usefulness of LLMs for this task.
“Other” licenses: Ten datasets declared that they were released under an “Other” license. One of
these was multi-licensed with other, more standard licenses, and in 5 of these cases the datasets
were aggregates of other datasets or source code files under various licenses. Hence, the “Other”
label was being used to convey that the end user will need to research the specific data points
or data subsets used, which could be a tedious and time consuming task. Four datasets included
licensing text/information in their READMEs. These were not standard license texts and in some
cases were very minimal. For example,dair-ai/emotionstates only, “The dataset should be used
for educational and research purposes only. ” Another dataset,jondurbin/airoboros-2.2.1, provides
text akin to a legal disclaimer: “Much (most) of the data was generated via gpt-4 API calls, which
has a restriction in the ToS about ‘competing’ models. Please seek legal advice if you plan to build
or use a model that includes this dataset in a commercial setting. ” The final dataset, which was
multi-licensed, declares Open Portion of the American National Corpus, which is a collection of
texts and not a license. It is possible this was meant to indicate that the license(s) of this corpus
apply to the dataset, or at least portions of it.
The “Unknown” license: Of the 96 observed and mappable datasets used by the top models,
8 (8%) were released under the “Unknown” license tag. Two of these were dataset aggregates
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: September 2025.
===== PAGE 34 =====
34
Trevor Stalnaker, Nathan Wintersgill, Oscar Chaparro, Laura A. Heymann, Massimiliano Di Penta, Daniel M German,
and Denys Poshyvanyk
Table 23. Top 5 Model-Dataset license pairs in Top 187 models
Model License Dataset License Count
apache-2.0 mit 33
apache-2.0 cc-by-4.0 9
apache-2.0 cc0-1.0 0
apache-2.0 odc-by 8
apache-2.0 cc-by-sa-4.0 6
where the different data points were made available under different licenses, such that choosing a
single license for the whole dataset would be difficult, if not impossible. (The same situation that
led other dataset owners to choose the “Other” license.) Three datasets had incomplete dataset
cards/READMEs and did not include any licensing information. One model reiterated that the
licensing of the released dataset was “Unknown” but included no elaboration. Two datasets stated
that the licensing of the dataset depended on the licensing of its dependent data sources. One of
these stated only that “[t]he University of Washington does not own the copyright of the questions
and documents included in TriviaQA. ” The other explained that “[t]he licensing status of the dataset
hinges on the legal status of the Pushshift.io data which is unclear. ” Despite using the “Unknown”
license, presumably due to uncertainty regarding how their dataset should be licensed, six (75%)
datasets still included citation information. Thus, similar to the “Other” license, the “Unknown”
license is not a monolith, encompassing a number of different scenarios. Here, we observed its
use for aggregates with multiple licenses, insufficient licensing information, or on its own without
further explanation.
Multi-licensing: There were two datasets that reported being released under multiple licenses.
The first of these,nyu-mll/multi_nli, reported four licenses, including the “Other” license option.
Clarification concerning how these licenses relate is found in the associated dataset card, which
explains that different portions of the dataset are released under different licenses. The second
example,legacy-datasets/wikipedia, reported two licenses, which also corresponded to portions
of the dataset. In both of these examples, we see that multi-licensing has been used to describe
a complex licensing scenario with different subsets of a dataset. This is contrary to the popular
usage in open-source, where such a licensing scheme implies either an AND or an OR relationship
between the licenses.
License differences across models and datasets: Given the difficulties in determining and inter-
preting the licensing for datasets that are multi-licensed or under the “Other” or “Unknown” license
tags, we omit them from this analysis analysis. To better understand relationships between the
licenses of models and datasets, we present an analysis considering the remaining 107 model-dataset
license pairs. Twenty-four pairs had licensing information that exactly matched (e.g., both the model
and dataset were released under theMITlicense). (We note that a perfect match is not required,
nor does it necessarily indicate full compliance with all licensing terms.) Eighty-three pairs did
not represent exact licensing matches. For example, one model was unlicensed despite relying
on seven datasets that had clearly defined licenses. Table 23 shows the most common pairings.
Notably, thecc-by-sa-4.0andcc-by-sa-3.0licenses are restrictive and require derivative works
to be released under the same license. Depending on whether models are considered derivatives
of their training data, the pairings (apache-2.0,cc-by-sa-4.0) and (apache-2.0,cc-by-sa-3.0) may
represent a compliance issue since the share-alike term for the dataset licenses would have been
violated.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: September 2025.
===== PAGE 35 =====
An Empirical Analysis of Machine Learning Model and Dataset Documentation, Supply Chain, and Licensing Challenges
on Hugging Face 35
9 CASE STUDY: TOP DATASETS
Similarly to the above analysis of top models, we provide an analysis of the 100 most liked and 100
most downloaded datasets.
9.1 Sample construction
This sample of the top datasets on Hugging Face consists of 185 distinct datasets; fifteen datasets
existed in both the top liked and the top downloaded. Across all 175,000 datasets in our full dataset,
there are 49,466,329 total downloads. The 185 most popular datasets account for 41,994,158 of these,
roughly 85%. This justifies that these models are worth further, more intensive investigation.
The datasets in the sample encompass 23 distinct tasks, including text generation (62), question-
answering (35), fill-mask (13), text-classification (12), text2text-generation (9), multiple-choice (8),
and summarization (7), and others with four or fewer occurrences.
The sample contains 136 unique dataset owners. Only nine own more than two datasets in the
sample, including Bigcode (8), AllenAI (5), EleutherAI (5), Mteb (5), Lighteval (4), HuggingFaceFW (3),
HuggingFaceH4 (3), The Mozilla Foundation (3), and BAAI (3).
Compared with the model analysis discussed previously, we notice that the distribution of
datasets seems to be more decentralized. Whereas the top 15 model uploaders owned 48.6% of the
top models, the top 15 dataset uploaders only owned 27.6% of the top datasets.
9.2 Supply chain
We observe a number of different dependency relationships among datasets in the sample. One such
relationship type involves transforming the data in one dataset into another format, such as the
Cohere/wikipedia-2023-11-embed-multilingual-v3dataset, which is a chunked and embedded
version of thewikimedia/wikipediadataset. We also observe aggregates of full datasets, such as
garage-bAInd/Open-Platypusandcerebras/SlimPajama-627B, or aggregates of such aggregates,
such asteknium/OpenHermes-2.5, which combinesgarage-bAInd/Open-Platypus(itself an
aggregate) with various other datasets.
9.3 Licensing
9.3.1 Presence of licensing information.To determine the presence of licensing for the datasets in
our collection, we used a combination of automated and manual processes. (We did not attempt
to perform a legal analysis of any licensing decision, including whether any particular dataset
was protectable under copyright law.) First, we used the Hugging Face API to obtain licensing
information from the dataset tags if it was available. For any datasets where we were unable
to identify a license through this process, we engaged in a manual analysis of the dataset card.
Forty-four datasets required such analysis; of these, 9 (20%) provided an exact license, while 14
(32%) offered some type of related licensing information, such as rules governing how individual
portions of the dataset were licensed. Licensing information sometimes had to be inferred from
other sources; for example, the license of one dataset (2%) could only be inferred from a linked
GitHub repository, and 5 datasets (11%) explained that they were aggregates of other datasets,
encouraging users to “Please refer to the licenses of the data subsets you use. ” We were unable to
access one dataset, which has presumably been removed from Hugging Face or made private, and
we were unable to locate any licensing information for the remaining 28 datasets. Thus, in total,
we obtained licensing information for 156 datasets (84%) in our collection, though this information
was not always sufficient to derive the exact licensing terms associated with the usage of a dataset.
We note that this is lower than the 91% observed in the most popular models. Several possible
explanations exist for the lack of licensing information in datasets. For example, it might be the
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: September 2025.
===== PAGE 36 =====
36
Trevor Stalnaker, Nathan Wintersgill, Oscar Chaparro, Laura A. Heymann, Massimiliano Di Penta, Daniel M German,
and Denys Poshyvanyk
case that reconciling the licensing and copyrights of thousands of data points or even dozens of
other datasets is outside the scope and expertise of most data scientists and model trainers. It might
also be the case that datasets are often created with the end goal of training an AI model, and
licensing/documenting them is not viewed as a priority by their creators.
9.3.2 Common licenses.Here, we look at the 131 datasets that had identifiable, non-“Unknown”
licenses (including custom licenses). Thirty-six (27%) were released underMIT, 26 (20%) under
Apache-2.0, 11 (8%) undercc-by-4.0, 10 (8%) underodc-by, 9 (7%) undercc-by-sa-4.0, 8 (6%) under
cc0-1.0, and 7 (5%) undercc-by-nc-4.0. We observe that, for the most part, these numbers mirror
those for the entire ecosystem (as seen in Table 14), with the primary exceptions being the omission
of theopenraillicense and the inclusion on theodc-bylicense. We also note that a majority of
the top datasets are permissively licensed.
9.3.3 Analysis of the “Unknown” license.Six datasets were tagged with the “Unknown” license, for
various reasons. One,BAAI/COIG-PC, was a dataset aggregate that provided rules on determining
which licensing terms applied to which portions of the dataset. An additional three included no
clear licensing guidance, and in fact, one hinted at violating the Terms of Service of a platform to
create the dataset. The license for one dataset could be inferred from a linked GitHub repository,
but the certainty is low. Lastly, the bookcorpus dataset, instead of offering simple, actionable
usage limitations or requirements, instead included a long essay on the complications and ethics
associated with mining data from a site (in this case smashwords) where the data authors are
unaware that their material could be used for training machine learning models and have therefore
not given consent for that usage. The dataset is still available on Hugging Face as of this writing,
but the legality surrounding its use seems unclear even to the dataset owner.
9.3.4 Analysis of the “Other” license.The sample also includes 16 datasets tagged with the “Other”
license. Of these, nine (56%) were aggregates that had individual datasets or data points licensed
under differing terms. We discuss the implications of these composite datasets in Section 10.2. Four
(25%) were under a custom license or non-standard licensing text, such as a short statement about
the intended use (e.g., “The dataset should be used for educational and research purposes only”)
or conditional licenses (e.g., “If the source data of LIMA has a stricter license than CC BY-NC-SA,
the LIMA dataset follows the same. Otherwise, it follows the CC BY-NC-SA license. ”). The latter
example illustrates how the task of license compliance—or, indeed, the task of determining the
licenses within the component itself—is often left to the user. Two additional datasets (12%) utilized
the “Other” tag, but we were unable to locate any additional licensing information, rendering
them effectively unlicensed. Lastly, we observed one dataset under the “creative-commons-by-nc”
license. This nonstandard form, not present in Hugging Face’s license list [35], is likely intended
to refer “cc-by-nc-2.0, ” “cc-by-nc-3.0, ” or “cc-by-nc-4.0. ” Without additional information, however,
it is impossible to determine with certainty the exact intended license, further highlighting the
limitations of using plain text fields and motivating the need for validation.
9.3.5 Analysis of Multi-licensed datasets.Three datasets in the sample—wikimedia/wikipedia,
Salesforce/wikitext, andlegacy-datasets/wikipedia, all of which are comprised of text pulled
from Wikipedia—reported more than one license in their tags, a combination of thecc-by-sa-3.0
andgfdllicenses. We note that user-written text that is submitted to Wikipedia is generally under
one of these two licenses as well. This example illustrates how multi-licensing schemes can attempt
to capture the complexities of the licensing relationships of the individual data points that make
up a dataset: bothwikimedia/wikipediaandlegacy-datasets/wikipediaprovide nuance with
statements such as, “Some text may be available only under the Creative Commons license; see
their Terms of Use for details. Text written by some authors may be released under additional
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: September 2025.
===== PAGE 37 =====
An Empirical Analysis of Machine Learning Model and Dataset Documentation, Supply Chain, and Licensing Challenges
on Hugging Face 37
licenses or into the public domain” and “Some text has been imported only under CC BY-SA and
CC BY-SA-compatible license and cannot be reused under GFDL; such text will be identified on
the page footer, in the page history, or on the discussion page of the article that utilizes the text. ”
Lastly, althoughSalesforce/wikitexttags both licenses, in the body of its model card it simply
states, “The dataset is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License
(CC BY-SA 4.0), ” excluding any mention of the GFDL. In addition to these examples, there were
three other datasets that provided no licensing information in their tags but were revealed to be
multi-licensed through manual analysis:uonlp/CulturaX,open-web-math/open-web-math,
andSkywork/SkyPile-150B. All three explicitly stated that the datasets were released under the
conditions of both licenses, representing an AND relationship (as described in Section 7.5.1). Recall
that Hugging Face does not provide a built-in way to specify such a relationship, necessitating
this clarification from the models. As shown from these examples, multi-licensing information can
sometimes be obscured in a way that limits the abilities of users to understand which licenses apply
in what manner, which can open the door to noncompliance by dependents.
10 DISCUSSION AND IMPLICATIONS
In this section we discuss the implications of our findings and potential directions for future work.
10.1 License compliance in the ML supply chain
In Section 6, we showed that the structure of the ML supply chain on Hugging Face consists
primarily of relatively short component chains. This presents a radically different landscape from
the traditional software supply chain, in which a single piece of software can depend on potentially
hundreds or even thousands of components. However, just because fewer dependencies are declared
does not mean that ensuring license compliance is any easier in this ecosystem. In fact, as we
observed, licensing information is often missing (Section 7) and there can be licensing differences
between parent and child models in a model’s lineage (Section 7.3). Compounded with our ob-
servation that datasets may also have unclear licensing (Section 7.1) and may go undeclared by
models (Section 6.2), the state of documentation on Hugging Face appears to be counterproductive
to successful license compliance.
The task of managing different licenses across a model’s components presents a novel challenge
due to the advent of ML-focused licenses and a heavy reliance onCClicenses. While previous work
has investigated compatibility between various traditional software licenses [68, 76], new licenses,
such as theOpenRAILfamily and theLlamalicenses, require analysis to understand how they
interact with existing licenses and with each other. Additionally, ML-focused licenses also indicate
legitimate uses for the model and any derivatives, further separating them from the traditional
open source definition. Proponents ofOpenRAILargue that existing open-source licenses are
“ill-adapted” to handle ML components’ differences from source code, particularly with respect to
the responsible use of such components [44]. This necessitates future work to provide a detailed
analysis of software licenses with respect to ML components, including an analysis of these licenses
and the ways in which licenses interact with ML components differently from traditional software.
It also becomes crucial to educate model owners and users on the terms associated with licenses.
For example, we observed that the simple naming requirements imposed by theLlama3license
were followed in only 14.2% of cases (Section 7.5.2). This suggests either extensive deliberate
noncompliance or, more likely, ignorance of the relevant license terms. To concretely identify the
cause and provide potential mitigations, future work should investigate developers’ views and
understanding of licenses in the ML supply chain.
It also remains unclear, particularly with the relationship between datasets and models, how
exactly license terms, such asGPL’s copyleft, should be applied [54]. To what extent should a model
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: September 2025.
===== PAGE 38 =====
38
Trevor Stalnaker, Nathan Wintersgill, Oscar Chaparro, Laura A. Heymann, Massimiliano Di Penta, Daniel M German,
and Denys Poshyvanyk
be considered a derivative work of the dataset(s) on which it was trained? More concretely, if a
model trainer trains a model on a dataset governed by a copyleft license and then distributes the
model, but not the dataset, has the trainer violated the dataset license? More fundamentally, to
what extent are ML datasets protected by copyright law in various jurisdictions? In other words, is
a particular selection and arrangement of data protected by copyright, or does copyright attach
only at the level of individual data, if at all? These questions and many others will likely need to be
resolved by legal teams, regulators, and possibly the courts.
We observed challenges presented by licensing datasets that contain data points under different
licenses (Sections 9.3.3 and 9.3.4). While these challenges are not new [ 75, 77], future research
and the Hugging Face development team should investigate more intuitive ways of conveying
that the licensing of a dataset depends on the specific portions used rather than allowing users
to obscure this information by the use of an “Other” label, instead reserving the “Other” label
for custom or non-standard licenses. Relatedly, dataset and model repositories should encourage
model/dataset uploaders to select from already existing licenses rather than using “Other” in order
to avoid rampant license proliferation. If custom license text is required, it should be within a
LICENSE file so that it is easy for users to locate and access.
Lastly, in Sections 7.5.1, 8.4.2 and 9.3.5, we also observed instances of ambiguity introduced
through multi-licensing. Determining the intended relationship among the multiple licenses as-
signed by the model/dataset owner can be a difficult task, and different pitfalls come with the
assumption of an OR versus an AND relationship. Model hubs should include standardized ways
for model/dataset owners to express these relationships and educate users on why they might want
to use a multi-licensing scheme.
10.2 Dataset aggregates
As discussed in Sections 9.3.3 and 9.3.4, some datasets on Hugging Face were aggregates or com-
posites of other datasets. In these situations, the uploader would leave license identification to the
end user, saying something to the effect of “Look at the licenses for the different subsets of this
dataset. ” In addition to raising potential compliance questions, the lack of standardization in the
way that this aggregate nature was conveyed potentially presents challenges. We observed model
uploaders using the “Unknown” and “Other” license options to refer to this composite nature. Other
uploaders opted to leave their dataset unlicensed in the tags and elaborated in the body of the
dataset card that the terms of the individual licenses needed to be complied with. Still others opted
to declare multiple licenses in their tags, not to indicate an AND or an OR relationship but rather to
indicate that different licenses applied to different subparts of the dataset (Section 9.3.5). Without
an additional field to allow owners to describe this type of licensing situation more precisely, this
structure is likely to contribute to developers’ difficulty with understanding licensing tasks, a
difficulty that previous work has explored [8].
The purpose of these dataset aggregates would seem to be assembling large quantities of training
data for machine learning models and making them easily accessible. Additional problems arise if
the licenses contained within an aggregate conflict. For example,nguha/legalbenchis composed
of datasets that are under two different copyleft CC licenses (Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 Inter-
nationalandAttribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International). It is not possible
to meet the terms of both licenses, meaning that this dataset composite and models trained on
this dataset risk being deemed noncompliant. This also poses risks for any end user, who might
not have the motivation or the knowledge to determine compliance, raising nonfunctional ethical
considerations that are deserving of attention by researchers.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: September 2025.
===== PAGE 39 =====
An Empirical Analysis of Machine Learning Model and Dataset Documentation, Supply Chain, and Licensing Challenges
on Hugging Face 39
10.3 Potential difficulties in using model cards as ML/AIBOMs
Amidst the growing push for better transparency and security in software through Software Bills of
Materials (SBOMs) [96, 116], calls have been made for similar BOMs for ML components [12, 13, 96,
116]. These documents serve as inventories of all components within a piece of software and can
document a variety of the software’s traits, including dependencies, licensing, and security. Distinct
ML/AI Bills of Materials (ML/AIBOMs) may be necessary to address such components’ different
inputs, security concerns (such as model poisoning), and ethical considerations [17, 78, 116, 117].
The SPDX [95] Working Group, operating under the auspices of the Linux Foundation, is developing
guidelines and a proposed standard for ML/AIBOMs [ 15] that will complement the SPDX ISO
Standard ISO/IEC 5962:2021, which describes the use of SBOMs to document the components used
in creating a software system [58]. CycloneDX [29] is also working on support for ML/AIBOMs [30].
Prior work has also suggested that model and data cards can serve as an ML/AIBOM [ 96], or
that the information they provide can assist with their creation [93, 117], but our work suggests
that these tools are not yet robust enough to serve this purpose. As we highlight in Section 5, the
information provided by model cards is often missing key elements, including datasets that the
models were trained on. This immediately obviates many of the benefits of ML/AIBOMs, including
understanding licensing obligations that might be associated with that dataset, being aware of
potential model poisoning attacks, and providing the ability to select models trained on ethically
sourced data. Additionally, instances in which model cards are locked behind Terms of Service
agreements or other restrictions (Section 5.1) could further limit their usefulness as ML/AIBOMs
to consumers. Our work provides additional evidence that, in practice, model cards contain little
actionable information, making them difficult to use as ML/AIBOMs [16].
10.4 The need for follow up surveys and interviews
Our study raises many questions concerning what motivates developers when they make deci-
sions concerning documentation, model reuse, and licensing. Conversations with Hugging Face
developers through surveys and interviews can help to bridge this gap. There are numerous key
questions such work should consider. What factors influence developers when choosing a license
for their dataset/model and what do they believe the scope of that license to be (Section 7.1)?
Why do developers so commonly opt to use an “Other” license (Section 7.1)? What motivates
developers to multi-license a model/dataset and what is the intention behind the license interaction
(Section 7.5.1)? Why do so few developers fine-tuning thellama3model comply with the naming
requirements imposed by thellama3license (Section 7.5.2)? What is the primary motivation for
developers to write documentation for their models? For each of the various stakeholders in the
space (model owners, fine-tuners, and users), which metadata fields do they perceive as most
important? Why are some models listed as datasets (Section 5.6)? Answers to these questions will
inform how future tools, practices, techniques, and even educational materials should be developed
to have maximal impact on the emerging ML community.
10.5 The addition of fields for recording model relationship information
As the relationships between ML models become more complex, it becomes increasingly important
to keep a record of those relationships (fine-tuned, quantized, ensemble, distillation,etc.). This
information is crucial not only for transparency and understanding how the model was created but
also for license compliance. Just as in traditional software, licenses may have terms that govern the
manner in which the component may be (re)used and distributed. For example, many generative
models disallow using generated content to train a derivative model [90]. As noted in Section 5.7,
Hugging Face provides no standardized way to express relationship information. This inability to
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: September 2025.
===== PAGE 40 =====
40
Trevor Stalnaker, Nathan Wintersgill, Oscar Chaparro, Laura A. Heymann, Massimiliano Di Penta, Daniel M German,
and Denys Poshyvanyk
specify relationships may have resulted in some model owners declaring models used in student-
teacher relationships as datasets (Section 5.6). We suggest that model hubs provide a standardized,
machine-readable way of conveying this type of information. Just as Hugging Face currently
provides a standard list of architectures, it could also provide a curated list of relationship types.
10.6 The need to use unique identifiers
While unique identifiers already exist on Hugging Face, they are not currently being used by
model/dataset owners. This can result in problems, particularly when trying to trace model/dataset
provenance. Model hubs should encourage their users to use these existing unique identifiers,
perhaps by including tools that facilitate the creation of model cards or the provision of metadata.
For example, a developer could supply a colloquial name for a model hosted on the platform, such as
the familiar owner/model convention, and the tool could automatically conduct a search and, where
possible, map the provided name to the unique ID. This would immediately alert the developer to
typos, remove ambiguities, and prevent the name drift issues we discussed in Sections 5.4 and 5.5.
Furthermore, such a system could potentially allow for automatic updates (or request manual
developer updates) when the information for downstream elements changes, thereby facilitating
an ecosystem which is more supportive of supply chain management tasks and lifting the burden
from downstream developers.
10.7 Differences between the ML supply chain and traditional software supply chain
Our findings highlight a notable difference between the ML supply chain and the traditional
software supply chain. In many software ecosystems with dependency management, dependency
information for components in the software supply chain is organized in manifest files such as
pom.xml, package.json, or requirements.txt. These files can then be used to generate other
dependency tracking documents like SBOMs and have also been used by forges like GitHub to build
dependency graphs [1]. Notably, however, these manifest files have utility beyond dependency
tracking. They are necessary for setting up a fresh installation of the software—that is, the list of
dependencies that must be downloaded in order for the software to function properly. This is not
the case with the information supplied by developers in model cards. Because erroneous mappings
to datasets and base models do not leave the model in question unusable as a practical matter, it is
therefore easier for typos and other mistakes to go unnoticed and thus uncorrected. This disconnect
between correctness and functionality necessitates tooling that has similar functionality and
richness to dependency management tools for traditional software, as it leaves ample opportunity
for errors without comparable means of checking for and correcting them.
10.8 Quality control for model hubs
Our analysis of the model documentation available on Hugging Face shows that the information
that developers provide is often incomplete, malformed, or available only in human-readable text.
We observed some documentation issues, such as the presence of duplicates in lists of datasets and
base models (Section 5.7) or the declaration of a model as its own base (Section 5.5) that could be
easily corrected by automated tools like linters. Additionally, an automated tool could also provide
standardization for data fields to facilitate metadata analysis. For example, the variants for how one
can specify that there are no datasets or base models ([], “”, andNone) should be standardized to a
single type. We are not suggesting that model hubs should be responsible for curating the metadata
of all models on their platforms, but where automated checks can efficiently be put into place and
this is easy to implement, they should be employed.
Potential solutions could closely resemble approaches to automatically check the quality of bug
reports. Similarly to how tools can check for important components of a bug report (e.g., expected
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: September 2025.
===== PAGE 41 =====
An Empirical Analysis of Machine Learning Model and Dataset Documentation, Supply Chain, and Licensing Challenges
on Hugging Face 41
behavior, steps to reproduce) [25], in theory, tools may be able to check for missing information in
model cards. Some work is already emerging in this area, such as DocML [16] and AIMML [103];
however, more work needs to be done to understand what suggestions should be made to model
owners, how to handle complex licensing scenarios, and how to best implement tools that assess
ML documentation.
Since license metadata for models and datasets is entered manually, there is the possibility that
typos are introduced. We encountered instances where the standard SPDX identifiercc-by-sa-4.0
was mistakenly entered ascc-by-sa 4.0(i.e., missing the final hyphen). While not a major issue,
typos like these necessitate that tools perform data cleaning in addition to any work related to
license compliance. Again, it would be preferable if Hugging Face provided a basic linter/validator
for model/dataset cards and provided users with a drop-down/auto-complete from which to select
popular licensing options, if this would be easy to implement.
10.9 Potential pitfalls when mining Hugging Face
The numerous documentation challenges that we discuss in Section 5 demonstrate that researchers
relying on Hugging Face mining to collect information on the ML supply chain must proceed
thoughtfully, with caution and care, to avoid potential pitfalls. Unlike source code forges like GitHub,
it seems that some model owners may be uploading and publishing models as a by-product of their
workflows [38, 40]. As such, we speculate that some models are made publicly available not because
the owner intends them to be reused by the community but rather because the owner is using the
resources of Hugging Face, Google Colab, or some other cloud provider [18]. This might explain why
we observed so many models with the same names, such asmy_awesome_modelwhich is the ex-
ample name used in the documentation for uploading a PyTorch model [40]. (See Section 5.4.) More
research is required to understand how such tools might populate the supply chain with such “inter-
mediate” models or those that are otherwise not intended for public consumption. To mitigate the
risk such models pose, future studies should be mindful of the models they include in their analysis,
erring toward those that are more popular. However, we caution researchers to be thoughtful in how
they determine model popularity. In the context of the supply chain, we believe that downloads is the
more appropriate metric, as opposed to likes. As shown in Table 6, the most liked “dataset” on Hug-
ging Face is in reality a repository curating ChatGPT system prompts (e.g., “Imagine you are an expe-
rience Ethereum developer... ”). Additionally, the repository forlllyasviel/sd_control_collection
(with 1,574 likes, but 0 downloads) is actually a collection of various models assembled “for users
to download flexibly. ” Future studies will be left to explore the prevalence of curated repositories
hosted as models/datasets and the exact nature of potentially ad hoc developer workflows.
10.10 Recommendations for Stakeholders
Here, we offer concise and actionable recommendations for various stakeholders involved in the
ML supply chain based on our results.
10.10.1 Model trainers and dataset curators.
(1) When licensing models and datasets, use tags, theCardDataattribute, and/or a LICENSE file
rather than including licensing information in the README or via an external source.
(2) When releasing a model or dataset under a multi-licensing scheme, clearly indicate how the
licenses relate.
(3) When choosing a license for models and datasets, where possible use common, pre-existing
licenses, rather than drafting a new license or modifying the terms of an existing one.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: September 2025.
===== PAGE 42 =====
42
Trevor Stalnaker, Nathan Wintersgill, Oscar Chaparro, Laura A. Heymann, Massimiliano Di Penta, Daniel M German,
and Denys Poshyvanyk
(4) When there is no choice but to draft a new license, make sure that the full license text is made
available in a LICENSE file available on the model/dataset repository. Also ensure that licensing
terms are unambiguous and comprehensive (e.g., more than “This model is open source”).
(5) When using models and datasets, particularly for larger or commercial projects, verify that the
declared license is consistent and compliant with other upstream sources.
10.10.2 Model and dataset sharing platforms.
(1) Provide intuitive ways for dataset curators to specify the licenses of their work, particularly
in the case of dataset aggregates. Simply using the “Other” or “Unknown” license options or
declaring multiple licenses without clarification seems insufficient.
(2) When designing documentation tools for model trainers and dataset curators, offer user-friendly
options, such as multi-select widgets ( with an “Other” option) and smart auto-complete text
fields, instead of simple plain text fields. This is particularly the case for for fields that have a
finite set of recognizable values, such as licenses, pipelines,etc.
(3) Perform basic validation of model/dataset metadata, including checking for obvious typos,
needless repetitions, or improper uses of fields.
(4) Automatically include unique identifiers for models and datasets listed as dependencies when
possible. Human readable names for both models and datasets can change over time, but
humans are also not well suited for working with the random strings of characters often
associated with unique identifiers. When models/datasets are referenced in the metadata of
other models/datasets, they should also be accompanied with a unique identifier that anchors
the dependency, even if the human readable name should change. For Hugging Face, this might
mean automatically adding the internal model ID as part of the base_model information in the
CardDataattribute.
(5) Offer standardized, precise ways for model trainers to specify the dependency relationships
between models (fine-tune, distillation, quantization,etc.), as these may have implications for
various supply chain management activities, including licensing compliance.
(6) For platforms that host both models and datasets, allow model trainers to specify where datasets
are located with an external link if they are not available directly on the platform in order to
make various provenance tasks significantly easier.
10.10.3 SE and Law Researchers.
(1) Be aware and cautious of the limitations and quirks of mining data from Hugging Face. For
example, the readily available “downloads” metadata field actually only reports downloads that
have occurred within the last 30 days. Total downloads can be accessed on a per query basis by
providing additional arguments through the API, but it is not possible (as far as the authors can
tell) to have the API return a list of models ordered by total downloads.
(2) Choose proxy metrics carefully. As described in Section 10.9, when using model/dataset popu-
larity/engagement as a proxy for quality or importance, be mindful that like count (similar to
GitHub’s stars) may not be as reliable as the download count.
(3) Understand that dependency information in the ML supply chain is more difficult to validate
than dependency information in the traditional supply chain as described in Section 10.7.
(4) Develop updated guidance and compliance matrices that can support stakeholders in the ML
ecosystem as they work with various different licenses in a novel context.
(5) Investigate developers’ views and understanding of licenses in the ML supply chain through
surveys and interviews.
(6) Know that not all models on Hugging Face were uploaded with the intent to publish. Instead,
some may be incidental uploads that are a by-product of developer workflows through which
they access cloud computing resources.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: September 2025.
===== PAGE 43 =====
An Empirical Analysis of Machine Learning Model and Dataset Documentation, Supply Chain, and Licensing Challenges
on Hugging Face 43
11 THREATS TO VALIDITY
Construct Validity.We rely on information that is available through the Hugging Face API in a
machine-readable format. We addressed cases where information was missing from this source by
applying Python’s request and BeautifulSoup libraries to retrieve missing information. However,
this means that we likely missed licensing and dependency information that was presented in
natural language. We measure and mitigate this risk with a review of the top 100 “unlicensed”
models sorted by number of downloads, which showed that the majority did not, in fact, declare a
license or declared a license in a non-standard or transitive way.
Internal Validity. We followed best practices in our mining and data cleaning approaches.
Conclusions were drawn based on empirical evidence found in the data. We relied on tags applied
to components to detect their licenses, but such information might be present in other, human-
readable forms or through links to other resources, such as a research paper or another repository.
The labeling of license categories is based on our understanding of the licenses. To mitigate bias in
these labels, two researchers examined each license to confirm the label applied to it.
External Validity.The generalizability of our findings is restricted by our choice of Hugging
Face, which might not be fully generalizable to all model-sharing platforms. It is possible that we
missed other challenges and obstacles faced by other model hubs or that different model-sharing
sites have different levels of documentation and dependency management techniques, given our
assumption that highly-downloaded models tend towards better documentation. We also observed
that relatively few models and datasets declared licensing information, and models often did not
declare any datasets. This implies that a great portion of the ecosystem may yet be undocumented.
As such, our results may be biased towards the components that do provide documentation, and
may be less generalizable to those which do not. We attempt to mitigate this risk by providing a
detailed analysis of top-rated components to capture the specific challenges facing components
that are used frequently and are thus applicable to many users. Additionally, given that the field of
AI is rapidly evolving and new models are created every day, the conclusions we reached might
be different if we were to take an updated snapshot of the supply chain at some future point.
The extent to which this factor might change our results is unknown, but we maintain that it is
important to capture an understanding of this nascent supply chain so that future investigations
can understand the ways in which the supply chain has changed over time.
12 CONCLUSION
In this work we conduct a comprehensive mining study and analysis of the ML supply chain
on Hugging Face. We construct a reusable dataset of over 750,000 models and 175,000 datasets,
which we make freely available in our replication package [97]. Using this data we create a supply
chain graph that illustrates the relationships between ML models and the models they depend
on, describe the notable features and properties of this supply chain, analyze the current state of
documentation on Hugging Face, and consider the current state of licensing and license compliance
in the ecosystem. We offer a rich discussion of the challenges that not just Hugging Face but any
sizable model hub will encounter. Lastly, we offer concrete and actionable recommendations for
various stakeholders involved with the ML supply chain that can be adopted to facilitate better
supply chain management.
DATA AVAILABILITY
We provide a replication package containing the raw mined data, our cleaned and normalized
dataset, scripts for data cleaning, mining utilities, analysis scripts, and other data required for
verifiability [97].
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: September 2025.
===== PAGE 44 =====
44
Trevor Stalnaker, Nathan Wintersgill, Oscar Chaparro, Laura A. Heymann, Massimiliano Di Penta, Daniel M German,
and Denys Poshyvanyk
13 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research has been supported in part by NSF grant CCF-2217733. Any opinions, findings, and
conclusions expressed herein are the authors’ and do not necessarily reflect those of the sponsors.
A complete, detailed list of image attributions can be found at [97].
REFERENCES
[1] [n. d.]. About the dependency graph. https://docs.github.com/en/code-security/supply-chain-security/understanding-
your-software-supply-chain/about-the-dependency-graph.
[2] [n. d.]. Apache License. https://opensource.org/license/apache-2-0. Accessed: 2025-14-06.
[3] [n. d.]. GNU General Public License version 3. https://opensource.org/license/gpl-3-0/. Accessed: 2023-14-09.
[4] [n. d.]. MIT License. https://opensource.org/license/mit/. Accessed: 2023-14-09.
[5] 2021. Copyright Registration of Computer Programs. https://www .copyright.gov/circs/circ61.pdf. Accessed:
2023-25-09.
[6] 2021. U.S. Code Title 17, Section 106. https://www .govinfo.gov/app/details/USCODE-2021-title17/USCODE-2021-
title17-chap1-sec106/summary. Accessed: 2023-25-09.
[7] Frank Morales Aguilera. 2025. Navigating the AI Licensing Labyrinth: Truly Open vs. Restricted "Open-Weight"
Models. https://medium .com/ai-simplified-in-plain-english/navigating-the-ai-licensing-labyrinth-truly-open-vs-
restricted-open-weight-models-89de5c2e649d.
[8] Daniel A Almeida, Gail C Murphy, Greg Wilson, and Michael Hoye. 2019. Investigating whether and how software
developers understand open source software licensing.Empirical Software Engineering24 (2019), 211–239.
[9] Andersen v. Stability AI Ltd. [n. d.]. Andersen v. Stability AI Ltd. 3:23-cv-00201, (N.D. Cal.).
[10] arxiv [n. d.]. arxiv. https://arxiv.org/.
[11] Authors Guild v. OpenAI Inc. 2023. Authors Guild v. OpenAI Inc., 1:23-cv-08292, (S.D.N.Y.).
[12] Iain Barclay, Alun Preece, Ian Taylor, Swapna Krishnakumar Radha, and Jarek Nabrzyski. 2022. Providing assurance
and scrutability on shared data and machine learning models with verifiable credentials.Concurrency and Computation:
Practice and Experience(2022), e6997.
[13] Iain Barclay, Alun Preece, Ian Taylor, and Dinesh Verma. 2019. Towards traceability in data ecosystems using a bill of
materials model.arXiv(2019).
[14] beautifulsoup 2025. BeautifulSoup. https://pypi.org/project/beautifulsoup4/.
[15] Karen Bennet, Gopi Krishnan Rajbahadur, Arthit Suriyawongkul, and Kate Stewart. 2024. A Comprehensive Guide to
Creating AI and Dataset Bill of Materials. https://spdx.dev/implementing-an-ai-bom/
[16] Avinash Bhat, Austin Coursey, Grace Hu, Sixian Li, Nadia Nahar, Shurui Zhou, Christian Kästner, and Jin LC Guo.
2023. Aspirations and practice of ML model documentation: Moving the needle with nudging and traceability. In
Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–17.
[17] Tingting Bi, Boming Xia, Zhenchang Xing, Qinghua Lu, and Liming Zhu. 2024. On the way to sboms: Investigating
design issues and solutions in practice.ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology33, 6 (2024), 1–25.
[18] Jeff Boudier and Philipp Schmid. [n. d.]. Hugging Face and Google partner for open AI collaboration. https:
//huggingface.co/blog/gcp-partnership.
[19] Blake Brittain. 2023. Authors sue Meta, Microsoft, Bloomberg in latest AI copyright clash. https://www .reuters.com/
legal/litigation/authors-sue-meta-microsoft-bloomberg-latest-ai-copyright-clash-2023-10-18/.
[20] Joel Castaño, Silverio Martínez-Fernández, and Xavier Franch. 2024. Lessons Learned from Mining the Hugging Face
Repository.arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.07323(2024).
[21] Joel Castaño, Silverio Martínez-Fernández, Xavier Franch, and Justus Bogner. 2023. Exploring the Carbon Footprint
of Hugging Face’s ML Models: A Repository Mining Study. In2023 ACM/IEEE International Symposium on Empirical
Software Engineering and Measurement (ESEM). IEEE, 1–12.
[22] Joel Castaño, Martínez-Fernández Silverio, Xavier Franch, and Justus Bogner. 2024. Analyzing the evolution and
maintenance of ML models on Hugging Face. InProceedings of the 21st International Conference on Mining Software
Repositories. 607–618.
[23] cc-by-4.0 [n. d.]. Attribution 4.0 International. https://creativecommons .org/licenses/by/4.0/. Accessed: 2025-14-06.
[24] cc-by-sa-4.0 [n. d.]. Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 International. https://creativecommons .org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/.
Accessed: 2025-14-06.
[25] Oscar Chaparro, Jing Lu, Fiorella Zampetti, Laura Moreno, Massimiliano Di Penta, Andrian Marcus, Gabriele Bavota,
and Vincent Ng. 2017. Detecting missing information in bug descriptions. InProceedings of the 2017 11th joint meeting
on foundations of software engineering. 396–407.
[26] Kenneth Ward Church, Zeyu Chen, and Yanjun Ma. 2021. Emerging trends: A gentle introduction to fine-tuning.
Natural Language Engineering27, 6 (2021), 763–778.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: September 2025.
===== PAGE 45 =====
An Empirical Analysis of Machine Learning Model and Dataset Documentation, Supply Chain, and Licensing Challenges
on Hugging Face 45
[27] Thomas Claburn. 2022. GPL legal battle: Vizio told by judge it will have to answer breach-of-contract claims.
https://www.theregister.com/2022/05/16/vizio_gpl_contract/. Accessed: 2023-14-09.
[28] Thomas Claburn. 2023. John Deere urged to surrender source code under GPL. https://www.theregister.com/2023/
03/17/john_deere_sfc_gpl/. Accessed: 2023-14-09.
[29] cyclonedx 2025. CycloneDX. https://cyclonedx.org/
[30] cyclonedx 2025. Machine Learning Bill of Materials (ML-BOM). https://cyclonedx.org/capabilities/mlbom/
[31] James C Davis, Purvish Jajal, Wenxin Jiang, Taylor R Schorlemmer, Nicholas Synovic, and George K Thiruvathukal.
2023. Reusing deep learning models: Challenges and directions in software engineering. In2023 IEEE John Vincent
Atanasoff International Symposium on Modern Computing (JV A). IEEE, 17–30.
[32] Moming Duan, Qinbin Li, and Bingsheng He. 2024. Modelgo: A practical tool for machine learning license analysis.
InProceedings of the ACM Web Conference 2024. 1158–1169.
[33] Margaret Mitchell Ezi Ozoani, Marissa Gerchick. 2022. Model Cards. https://huggingface.co/blog/model-cards.
[34] Hugging Face. [n. d.]. User Studies. https://huggingface.co/docs/hub/en/model-cards-user-studies.
[35] Hugging Face. 2024. Licenses. https://huggingface.co/docs/hub/en/repositories-licenses.
[36] Hugging Face. 2024. Model Card Template. https://github .com/huggingface/huggingface_hub/blob/main/src/
huggingface_hub/templates/modelcard_template.md.
[37] Hugging Face. 2025. Libraries. https://huggingface.co/docs/hub/models-libraries.
[38] Hugging Face. 2025. Model sharing and uploading. https://huggingface.co/transformers/v4.10.1/model_sharing.html.
[39] Hugging Face. 2025. Pipelines. https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/main_classes/pipelines.
[40] Hugging Face. 2025. Uploading models. https://huggingface.co/docs/hub/en/models-uploading.
[41] Hugging Face. [n.d.]. Model Card Guidebook. https://huggingface.co/docs/hub/en/model-card-guidebook.
[42] Hugging Face. [n.d.]. Model Cards. https://huggingface.co/docs/hub/en/model-cards.
[43] Hugging Face. [n.d.]. Model Cards Writing Tool. https://huggingface .co/spaces/huggingface/Model_Cards_Writing_
Tool.
[44] Carlos Muñoz Ferrandis. [n. d.]. OpenRAIL: Towards open and responsible AI licensing frameworks. https://
opensource.org/ai/webinars/should-we-use-open-source-licenses-for-ml-ai-models.
[45] PyTorch Foundation. 2025. The Open Source Legacy and AI’s Licensing Challenge. https://pytorch .org/blog/the-
open-source-legacy-and-ais-licensing-challenge/.
[46] Kai Gao, Runzhi He, Bing Xie, and Minghui Zhou. 2024. Characterizing Deep Learning Package Supply Chains in
PyPI: Domains, Clusters, and Disengagement.ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol.33, 4 (2024), 97:1–97:27.
[47] James G. Gatto. 2025. AI Drives Need for New Open Source Licenses – Linux Publishes the OpenMDW License.
https://natlawreview.com/article/ai-drives-need-new-open-source-licenses-linux-publishes-openmdw-license.
[48] Amir Gholami, Sehoon Kim, Zhen Dong, Zhewei Yao, Michael W Mahoney, and Kurt Keutzer. 2022. A survey of
quantization methods for efficient neural network inference. InLow-Power Computer Vision. Chapman and Hall/CRC,
291–326.
[49] glenn. 2004. Announcing (and explaining) our new 2.0 licenses. https://creativecommons .org/2004/05/25/
announcingandexplainingournew20licenses/.
[50] Micah Goldblum, Dimitris Tsipras, Chulin Xie, Xinyun Chen, Avi Schwarzschild, Dawn Xiaodong Song, Alek-
sander Madry, Bo Li, and Tom Goldstein. 2020. Dataset Security for Machine Learning: Data Poisoning, Back-
door Attacks, and Defenses.IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence45 (2020), 1563–1580.
https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:229934464
[51] Google Inc. 2024. TensorFlow Hub https://www.tensorflow.org/hub.
[52] Grant Gross. 2007. Open-source legal group strikes again on BusyBox, suing Verizon. https:
//www.computerworld.com/article/2537947/open-source-legal-group-strikes-again-on-busybox--suing-
verizon.html. Accessed: 2023-14-09.
[53] Neil Gunningham, Robert A Kagan, and Dorothy Thornton. 2004. Social License and Environmental Protection:
Why Businesses Go Beyond Compliance.Law & Social Inquiry29, 2 (2004), 307–341. https://doi .org/10.1111/j.1747-
4469.2004.tb00338.x.
[54] Mary Hardy. [n. d.]. Should we use open source licenses for ML/AI models? https://huggingface .co/blog/open_rail.
[55] Ahmed E Hassan, Dayi Lin, Gopi Krishnan Rajbahadur, Keheliya Gallaba, Filipe Roseiro Cogo, Boyuan Chen, Haoxiang
Zhang, Kishanthan Thangarajah, Gustavo Oliva, Jiahuei Lin, et al. 2024. Rethinking software engineering in the era
of foundation models: A curated catalogue of challenges in the development of trustworthy fmware. InCompanion
Proceedings of the 32nd ACM International Conference on the Foundations of Software Engineering. 294–305.
[56] Geoffrey Hinton. 2015. Distilling the Knowledge in a Neural Network.arXiv preprint arXiv:1503.02531(2015).
[57] Hugging Face Inc. 2024. Hugging Face https://huggingface.co. https://huggingface.co
[58] ISO/IEC 5962:2021 2021.Information technology — SPDX V2.2.1. Standard. International Organization for Standardiza-
tion, Geneva, CH.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: September 2025.
===== PAGE 46 =====
46
Trevor Stalnaker, Nathan Wintersgill, Oscar Chaparro, Laura A. Heymann, Massimiliano Di Penta, Daniel M German,
and Denys Poshyvanyk
[59] Wenxin Jiang, Vishnu Banna, Naveen Vivek, Abhinav Goel, Nicholas Synovic, George K Thiruvathukal, and James C
Davis. 2024. Challenges and practices of deep learning model reengineering: A case study on computer vision.
Empirical Software Engineering29, 6 (2024), 142.
[60] Wenxin Jiang, Chingwo Cheung, Mingyu Kim, Heesoo Kim, George K Thiruvathukal, and James C Davis. 2024.
Naming Practices of Pre-Trained Models in Hugging Face.arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.01642(2024).
[61] Wenxin Jiang, Chingwo Cheung, George K Thiruvathukal, and James C Davis. 2023. Exploring naming conventions
(and defects) of pre-trained deep learning models in hugging face and other model hubs.arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.01642
(2023).
[62] Wenxin Jiang, Jason Jones, Jerin Yasmin, Nicholas Synovic, Rajeev Sashti, Sophie Chen, George K Thiruvathukal,
Yuan Tian, and James C Davis. 2023. PeaTMOSS: Mining Pre-Trained Models in Open-Source Software.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2310.03620(2023).
[63] Wenxin Jiang, Nicholas Synovic, Matt Hyatt, Taylor R. Schorlemmer, Rohan Sethi, Yung-Hsiang Lu, George K.
Thiruvathukal, and James C. Davis. 2023. An Empirical Study of Pre-Trained Model Reuse in the Hugging Face
Deep Learning Model Registry.2023 IEEE/ACM 45th International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE)(2023),
2463–2475. https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:257365660
[64] Wenxin Jiang, Nicholas Synovic, Purvish Jajal, Taylor R Schorlemmer, Arav Tewari, Bhavesh Pareek, George K
Thiruvathukal, and James C Davis. 2023. PTMTorrent: A Dataset for Mining Open-source Pre-trained Model Packages.
In 2023 IEEE/ACM 20th International Conference on Mining Software Repositories (MSR). 57–61.
[65] Wenxin Jiang, Nicholas Synovic, Rohan Sethi, Aryan Indarapu, Matt Hyatt, Taylor R Schorlemmer, George K Thiru-
vathukal, and James C Davis. 2022. An empirical study of artifacts and security risks in the pre-trained model supply
chain. InProceedings of the 2022 ACM Workshop on Software Supply Chain Offensive Research and Ecosystem Defenses.
105–114.
[66] Wenxin Jiang, Jerin Yasmin, Jason Jones, Nicholas Synovic, Jiashen Kuo, Nathaniel Bielanski, Yuan Tian, George K
Thiruvathukal, and James C Davis. 2024. Peatmoss: A dataset and initial analysis of pre-trained models in open-source
software. In2024 IEEE/ACM 21st International Conference on Mining Software Repositories (MSR). IEEE, 431–443.
[67] Jason Jones, Wenxin Jiang, Nicholas Synovic, George Thiruvathukal, and James Davis. 2024. What do we know about
Hugging Face? A systematic literature review and quantitative validation of qualitative claims. InProceedings of the
18th ACM/IEEE International Symposium on Empirical Software Engineering and Measurement. 13–24.
[68] Georgia Kapitsaki, Athina Paphitou, and Achilleas Achilleos. 2022. Towards open source software licenses compati-
bility check. InProceedings of the 26th Pan-Hellenic Conference on Informatics. 96–101.
[69] Georgia M Kapitsaki, Maria Papoutsoglou, Daniel M German, and Lefteris Angelis. 2020. What do developers talk
about open source software licensing?. In2020 46th Euromicro Conference on Software Engineering and Advanced
Applications (SEAA). IEEE, 72–79.
[70] Kate Knibbs. 2025. Meta Secretly Trained Its AI on a Notorious Piracy Database, Newly Unredacted Court Docs
Reveal. https://www.wired.com/story/new-documents-unredacted-meta-copyright-ai-lawsuit/
[71] Jing Yu Koh. 2024. Model Zoo: Discover open source deep learning code and pretrained models https://modelzoo .co.
[72] Keita Kurita, Paul Michel, and Graham Neubig. 2020. Weight Poisoning Attacks on Pretrained Models.ArXiv
abs/2004.06660 (2020). https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:215754328
[73] Andrew M. St. Laurent. 2004.Understanding Open Source and Free Software Licensing. O’Reilly, Sebastopol, California.
[74] Katherine Lee, A Feder Cooper, and James Grimmelmann. 2023. Talkin’ ’Bout AI Generation: Copyright and the
Generative-AI Supply Chain.arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.08133(2023).
[75] Katherine Lee, A Feder Cooper, James Grimmelmann, and Daphne Ippolito. 2023. AI and Law: The Next Generation.
A vailable at SSRN 4580739(2023).
[76] Tao Liu, Chengwei Liu, Tianwei Liu, He Wang, Gaofei Wu, Yang Liu, and Yuqing Zhang. 2024. Catch the Butterfly:
Peeking into the Terms and Conflicts among SPDX Licenses.arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.10636(2024).
[77] Shayne Longpre, Robert Mahari, Anthony Chen, Naana Obeng-Marnu, Damien Sileo, William Brannon, Niklas
Muennighoff, Nathan Khazam, Jad Kabbara, Kartik Perisetla, et al. 2023. The data provenance initiative: A large scale
audit of dataset licensing & attribution in ai.arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.16787(2023).
[78] Qinghua Lu, Liming Zhu, Xiwei Xu, Yue Liu, Zhenchang Xing, and Jon Whittle. 2024. A taxonomy of foundation
model based systems through the lens of software architecture. InProceedings of the IEEE/ACM 3rd International
Conference on AI Engineering-Software Engineering for AI. 1–6.
[79] Tshilidzi Marwala, Eleonore Fournier-Tombs, and Serge Stinckwich. 2023. The use of synthetic data to train ai models:
Opportunities and risks for sustainable development.arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.00652(2023).
[80] Saeed Masoudnia and Reza Ebrahimpour. 2014. Mixture of experts: a literature survey.Artificial Intelligence Review
42 (2014), 275–293.
[81] Heather Meeker. 2017.Open source for business: a practical guide to open source software licensing. CreateSpace.
[82] Meta. 2024. META LLAMA 3 COMMUNITY LICENSE AGREEMENT. https://llama.meta.com/llama3/license/.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: September 2025.
===== PAGE 47 =====
An Empirical Analysis of Machine Learning Model and Dataset Documentation, Supply Chain, and Licensing Challenges
on Hugging Face 47
[83] Microsoft. [n.d.]. trocr-base-handwritten. https://huggingface.co/microsoft/trocr-base-handwritten.
[84] Microsoft. [n.d.]. trocr-large-stage1. https://huggingface.co/microsoft/trocr-large-stage1.
[85] Margaret Mitchell, Simone Wu, Andrew Zaldivar, Parker Barnes, Lucy Vasserman, Ben Hutchinson, Elena Spitzer,
Inioluwa Deborah Raji, and Timnit Gebru. 2019. Model cards for model reporting. InProceedings of the conference on
fairness, accountability, and transparency. 220–229.
[86] Christopher Moran. 2021. Machine Learning, Ethics, and Open Source Licensing (Part II/II). https://thegradient .pub/
machine-learning-ethics-and-open-source-licensing-2/.
[87] networkx 2024. NetworkX - Network Analysis in Python. https://networkx.org/.
[88] Chinenye Okafor, Taylor R Schorlemmer, Santiago Torres-Arias, and James C Davis. 2022. Sok: Analysis of software
supply chain security by establishing secure design properties. InProceedings of the 2022 ACM Workshop on Software
Supply Chain Offensive Research and Ecosystem Defenses. 15–24.
[89] OpenAI. [n. d.]. clip-vit-large-patch14-336. https://huggingface.co/openai/clip-vit-large-patch14-336.
[90] openai-terms 2023. Legalities of self improving agents. https://community .openai.com/t/legalities-of-self-improving-
agents/560666.
[91] Ernesto Lang Oreamuno, Rohan Faiyaz Khan, Abdul Ali Bangash, Catherine Stinson, and Bram Adams. 2024. The
state of documentation practices of third-party machine learning models and datasets.IEEE Software(2024).
[92] David Patterson, Joseph Gonzalez, Quoc Le, Chen Liang, Lluis-Miquel Munguia, Daniel Rothchild, David So, Maud
Texier, and Jeff Dean. 2021. Carbon Emissions and Large Neural Network Training. http://arxiv .org/abs/2104.10350
[93] Federica Pepe, Vittoria Nardone, Antonio Mastropaolo, Gabriele Bavota, Gerardo Canfora, and Massimiliano Di Penta.
2024. How do Hugging Face Models Document Datasets, Bias, and Licenses? An Empirical Study. InProceedings of
the 32nd IEEE/ACM International Conference on Program Comprehension. 370–381.
[94] requests 2024. requests. https://pypi.org/project/requests/.
[95] spdx 2025. SPDX. https://spdx.dev/
[96] Trevor Stalnaker, Nathan Wintersgill, Oscar Chaparro, Massimiliano Di Penta, Daniel M German, and Denys Poshy-
vanyk. 2024. BOMs Away! Inside the Minds of Stakeholders: A Comprehensive Study of Bills of Materials for Software
Systems. InProceedings of the 46th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Software Engineering. 1–13.
[97] Trevor Stalnaker, Nathan Wintersgill, Oscar Chaparro, Laura A. Heymann, Massimiliano Di Penta, Daniel M German,
and Denys Poshyvanyk. 2025. Online replication package. https://archive .softwareheritage.org/browse/origin/
directory/?origin_url=https://github.com/TStalnaker44/hugging_face_analysis_replication.
[98] Yu Sun, Xinhao Li, Karan Dalal, Jiarui Xu, Arjun Vikram, Genghan Zhang, Yann Dubois, Xinlei Chen, Xiaolong
Wang, Sanmi Koyejo, et al. 2024. Learning to (learn at test time): Rnns with expressive hidden states.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2407.04620(2024).
[99] Xin Tan, Kai Gao, Minghui Zhou, and Li Zhang. 2022. An exploratory study of deep learning supply chain. In
Proceedings of the 44th International Conference on Software Engineering. 86–98.
[100] Mina Taraghi, Gianolli Dorcelus, Armstrong Foundjem, Florian Tambon, and Foutse Khomh. 2024. Deep learning
model reuse in the huggingface community: Challenges, benefit and trends.arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.13177(2024).
[101] Mistral AI team. 2023. Mixtral of experts. https://mistral.ai/news/mixtral-of-experts/.
[102] The Linux Foundation. 2024. PyTorch Hub https://pytorch.org/hub.
[103] Jason Tsay, Alan Braz, Martin Hirzel, Avraham Shinnar, and Todd W. Mummert. 2020. AIMMX: Artificial Intelligence
Model Metadata Extractor. InMSR ’20: 17th International Conference on Mining Software Repositories, Seoul, Republic of
Korea, 29-30 June, 2020. ACM, 81–92.
[104] Ashlee Vance. 2010. The Defenders of Free Software. https://www .nytimes.com/2010/09/26/business/26ping.html.
Accessed: 2023-14-09.
[105] Christopher Vendome. 2015. A large scale study of license usage on github. In2015 IEEE/ACM 37th IEEE International
Conference on Software Engineering, Vol. 2. IEEE, 772–774.
[106] Christopher Vendome, Daniel M German, Massimiliano Di Penta, Gabriele Bavota, Mario Linares-Vásquez, and
Denys Poshyvanyk. 2018. To distribute or not to distribute? why licensing bugs matter. InProceedings of the 40th
International Conference on Software Engineering. 268–279.
[107] Nick Vidal. 2023. The most popular licenses for each language in 2023. https://opensource.org/blog/the-most-popular-
licenses-for-each-language-2023.
[108] James Vincent. 2022. The lawsuit that could rewrite the rules of AI copyright. https://www .theverge.com/2022/11/8/
23446821/microsoft-openai-github-copilot-class-action-lawsuit-ai-copyright-violation-training-data.
[109] Ying Wang, Shing-Chi Cheung, Hai Yu, and Zhiliang Zhu. 2025. Managing Software Supply Chains. (2025).
[110] Zhi Wang, Chaoge Liu, and Xiang Cui. 2021. EvilModel: Hiding Malware Inside of Neural Network Models.2021
IEEE Symposium on Computers and Communications (ISCC)(2021), 1–7. https://api .semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:
236087474
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: September 2025.
===== PAGE 48 =====
48
Trevor Stalnaker, Nathan Wintersgill, Oscar Chaparro, Laura A. Heymann, Massimiliano Di Penta, Daniel M German,
and Denys Poshyvanyk
[111] Matt White, Ibrahim Haddad, Cailean Osborne, Xiao-Yang Yanglet Liu, Ahmed Abdelmonsef, Sachin Varghese, and
Arnaud Le Hors. 2024. The Model Openness Framework: Promoting Completeness and Openness for Reproducibility,
Transparency, and Usability in Artificial Intelligence. arXiv:2403.13784 [cs.LG] https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.13784
[112] Kyle Wiggers. 2025. ‘Open’ AI model licenses often carry concerning restrictions. https://techcrunch.com/2025/03/
14/open-ai-model-licenses-often-carry-concerning-restrictions/.
[113] Laurie Williams, Giacomo Benedetti, Sivana Hamer, Ranindya Paramitha, Imranur Rahman, Mahzabin Tamanna,
Greg Tystahl, Nusrat Zahan, Patrick Morrison, Yasemin Acar, et al. 2025. Research directions in software supply
chain security.ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology34, 5 (2025), 1–38.
[114] Nathan Wintersgill, Trevor Stalnaker, Laura A Heymann, Oscar Chaparro, and Denys Poshyvanyk. 2024. “The Law
Doesn’t Work Like a Computer”: Exploring Software Licensing Issues Faced by Legal Practitioners.Proceedings of the
ACM on Software Engineering1, FSE (2024), 882–905.
[115] Yuhao Wu, Yuki Manabe, Tetsuya Kanda, Daniel M German, and Katsuro Inoue. 2017. Analysis of license inconsistency
in large collections of open source projects.Empirical Software Engineering22 (2017), 1194–1222.
[116] Boming Xia, Tingting Bi, Zhenchang Xing, Qinghua Lu, and Liming Zhu. 2023. An empirical study on software
bill of materials: Where we stand and the road ahead. In2023 IEEE/ACM 45th International Conference on Software
Engineering (ICSE). IEEE, 2630–2642.
[117] Boming Xia, Dawen Zhang, Yue Liu, Qinghua Lu, Zhenchang Xing, and Liming Zhu. 2023. Trust in Software Supply
Chains: Blockchain-Enabled SBOM and the AIBOM Future.arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.02088(2023).
[118] Enneng Yang, Li Shen, Guibing Guo, Xingwei Wang, Xiaochun Cao, Jie Zhang, and Dacheng Tao. 2024. Model merging
in llms, mllms, and beyond: Methods, theories, applications and opportunities.arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.07666(2024).
[119] Xinyu Yang, Weixin Liang, and James Zou. 2024. Navigating Dataset Documentations in AI: A Large-Scale Analysis
of Dataset Cards on Hugging Face.arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.13822(2024).
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: September 2025.